
The Noble Account of Dharma
The Teaching by the Child Inconceivable Radiance
The Translation
$1[275.a] Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
$2Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavān was residing in Śrāvastī, in the Jeta Grove of Anāthapiṇḍada’s park, together with a great saṅgha of one thousand two hundred and fifty bhikṣus and a full five hundred additional bodhisattvas.
$3While the Bhagavān was residing in the town of Śrāvastī, its king and his senior ministers, the brahmins, householders, and people from the greater township, along with their families, paid respect, offered reverence and veneration, and presented offerings to the Bhagavān so that he received much fine food, drink, and other items to be eaten and sipped.
$4He was a blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha, one with perfect knowledge and conduct, a blissful one, a knower of the world, a charioteer who tamed beings, an unexcelled being, and a teacher of gods and humans. The Blessed Buddha was renowned for his outstanding caste, outstanding clan, outstanding patrilineage, outstanding discipline, outstanding absorption, outstanding insight, outstanding liberation, and outstanding wisdom vision of liberation.#6 The Bhagavān’s fame and renown was thus widespread throughout the world. 
$5The Blissful One, the knower of the world, the charioteer who tames beings, the unexcelled being, the teacher of gods and humans, the blessed Buddha, was also teaching the Dharma. That is, he was genuinely and fully teaching the sanctified conduct: what is virtuous at first, in the interim, and in the end, what has excellent meaning and excellent words, and what is unadulterated, perfect, [275.b] pure, and cleansed.
$6He was also in possession of the five eyes, namely the eye of flesh, the divine eye, the eye of Dharma, the eye of insight, and the eye of a buddha. The Bhagavān had soundly defeated non-Buddhist schools such as the carakas, the parivrājakas, and the followers of the Nirgrantha Jñātiputra. Gods and humans wholly adopted the Bhagavān’s teachings and so they spread everywhere.
$7Early one morning, the Bhagavān dressed in his Dharma robes and skirt and took up his alms bowl. The assembly of bhikṣus, the saṅgha of bhikṣus, along with the bodhisattva mahāsattvas, surrounded him and accompanied him. He was beautiful to behold from the front, the right, and the left; his strides were beautiful. Wearing the Dharma robes—the outer robe, the upper robe, and the inner robe—and the strainer and the alms bowl, he was beautiful. His complexion was golden, and he radiated an aura of light a full arm span around him. It was like a mass of fire amidst the darkness of night, like the full moon on the fifteenth lunar day, and like the shining of the sun. He possessed the thirty-two signs of a superior being. 
$8They went to receive alms in the town of Śrāvastī, and at the very moment that the Bhagavān set his foot down at the threshold of the gate, reaching the town, some magnificent, amazing, miraculous feats took place. I shall recount the incredible, great miracles that occurred when the holy being, the Guide, arrived, so listen with a most faithful heart. 
$9Those who were blind were able to see. Those who were deaf were able to hear. The naked found clothing. Those with mental illness regained their faculties. All the townsfolk joined their palms in reverence, offering homage to the Blissful One. The pleasant sounds of great gongs, earthen drums, and steel drums were audible, although none were struck. Ducks, geese, herons, peacocks, parrots, and cuckoos voiced their [276.a] delightful songs. Those who had lost their fortunes recovered them. Vessels made of gold and silver rang out, although none were struck. 
$10The earth itself rumbled and shook six times, and no beings were left without refuge, as their minds were filled with sincere trust. Wherever strode the feet of the most eloquent and holy Buddha, there appeared immaculate lotuses in elegant arrangements. 
$11Those beings born in the animal realm who saw him found happiness and would be reborn in the higher realms. Those women who were pregnant gave birth, without the slightest discomfort, to fine-featured, attractive babies. No beings harmed one another out of attachment, aversion, or indifference. They spoke to one another in the most non-aggressive manner, the way a father or mother would speak to an only child.
$12The sides of the road became beautifully decorated. All the gods dwelling in the heavens above copiously tossed flower petals. There were no beings left who underwent suffering. Beings who had been ill became free from illness and so felt happy. 
$13As the Blissful One passed by,#7 each person wondered, “Is the Tathāgata looking at me alone?” They each thought, “I shall make my own offering of alms and so reap the exact result of offering alms to the guide of humans.” It was not at all easy to fathom what occurred just from him passing by.#8
$14Then, the Bhagavān went out to receive alms, making his rounds through the town of Śrāvastī. The Bhagavān reached a place near the center of town where a fine-figured, lovely, and attractive child had been left all alone inside a deserted dwelling. The child was sitting there sucking on his right thumb. A number of dogs, or jackals, had gathered inside the empty house [276.b] and were approaching the child and licking him. However, due to his past virtues, these animals caused no harm to the young child. Some of the townsfolk were also going in and out of the deserted building.
$15Seeing the townsfolk coming and going, the Bhagavān knowingly directed Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, go and see what is inside that deserted house, the one all those townsfolk are entering and leaving.” As he had been commanded by the Bhagavān, Venerable Ānanda went to the deserted house, and upon arriving saw a fine-figured child, beautiful and lovely to behold, sitting there sucking on his right thumb and staring openly at the crowd of people around him.
$16After seeing this, Venerable Ānanda returned to the Bhagavān and reported, “Bhagavān, inside that deserted house is an abandoned child whose body is well formed, beautiful, and attractive, like a precious jewel. He sits there gazing with wide eyes at all the people gathered around him.”
$17The Bhagavān thought, “Aha! This child, through his outstanding training in previous lives, has the ability to understand the meaning of my teachings, and so is most fortunate!”#9 Out of affection for that child, and in order to lead the common folk to virtue,#10 he went to the deserted dwelling.
$18When the Bhagavān reached the dwelling, he entered and took a seat to the side of the child and then addressed the following verse to him:
“Frequented by snakes and yakṣas, This charnel ground is most frightening.How could a child not be frightened here?And yet, here you are now, all alone!”#11
$19Through the power of the Buddha and as a result of his own prior roots of virtue, the child then responded to the Bhagavān with these verses:
“Mighty Sage, who should feel fearToward phenomena#12 that have no self-identity?Omniscient One, supreme speaker, [277.a]Whatever the action through which I came to be here,
$20“There is no self nor something done by a self.For the self does not belong to anything at all;I see no self belonging to someone,Nor do I see someone belonging to a self.”
$21The Bhagavān replied:
“Evil actions performed in the pastHave ripened in this way.Abandoned in this deserted house,Surely you are experiencing feelings of suffering.”
$22The child asked:#13
“Gautama, do you still perceiveThat there is a deserted house?Didn’t you fully understand perceptionWhile on the seat of awakening?”
$23The Bhagavān answered:
“I fully understand perception,And I myself have no perceptions.Rather, it is out of love for youThat I have come to this deserted house.”
$24The child asked:
“When, no matter how hard you look,Sentient beings are never to be found,Where does compassion arise?Toward whom is your love directed?”
$25The Bhagavān answered:
“These beings do not know emptiness,The peace of no self-identity;And so, out of love for those very beings,I engage in meritorious action.”#14
$26The child asked:
“Although he has fathomed the empty and tranquil,#15And realized tranquil emptiness, Could it be that the TathāgataStill has not rid himself of error?”
$27The Bhagavān answered:
“Having realized the peace of emptiness,The Guide delivers this Dharma teaching In order to mature beings.That is the compassion of the buddhas.”
$28The child asked:
“Tathāgata, yet again, You have not rejected your error.If there is no perception of beings,Where could compassion possibly arise?”
$29The Bhagavān answered:
“Having embraced well the awakening mind,Superior people don their armorAnd naturally bestow blessingsUpon nonexistent beings.”
$30The child said:
“Since nowhere is an entity observed,All armor, in fact, is unreal. [277.b]For phenomena that have no substance,There is no armor to be found.”
$31The Bhagavān answered:
“Although phenomena have no substance,This Dharma taught to living creaturesIs the vibrant display of compassionOf the lord protectors of the world.”
$32The child asked:
“As for Dharma, if words do not exist,Where else could instructions be?Might you be misleading worldly beings?Or are you teaching Dharma that is not Dharma?”#16
$33The Bhagavān answered:#17
“I do not deceive the world.Nor do I profess what is not Dharma.What I do is remove the mental disturbances Of mistaken beings.”
$34The child asked:
“As a root of mental disturbances does not exist,They have no location, Neither inside nor outside. So how can mental disturbances be purified?”
$35The Bhagavān answered:
“Things that arise from errorAre born entirely of imputation;And so, to rid them of all concepts,I teach the Dharma to living beings.”
$36The child said:
“No matter how many imputations you seek,Mind is by nature luminosityIn which mental disturbance does not occurAnd which never becomes disturbed.”
$37The Bhagavān answered:
“It is just as you say—Mind is ever luminous, and yetProvisional, proximal disturbancesDisturb the minds of ordinary beings.”
$38The child asked:
“If mental disturbances are not there to see And are not present from their own side,How can they be provisional? That is the question; please explain this to me.”
$39The Bhagavān answered:
“Consider how clouds appear in the sky,But are not as they appear.The arising of mental disturbances is like that; They too appear, yet are not that way.”
$40The child said:
“Any phenomenon unmistaken in natureSimply remains that way; that is how it is.No mistaken nature can be seenIn a phenomenon whose nature is unmistaken.” 
$41The Bhagavān answered:
“It is those with childish perception [278.a]Who falsely conceive such things to be,And tathāgatas who appear in order To bring their minds to realization.”
$42The child asked:
“Considering they are not born,Which perfect buddhas could appear?The appearance of a buddha makes no senseWhere phenomena themselves have no birth.” 
$43The Bhagavān answered:
“The appearance of a buddhaIs explained as birthless birth,A conventional designationThat ultimately does not exist.”
$44The child said:
“You still have two perceptions,One conventional and one ultimate,Which contradicts the path of one vehicleThat you profess, Gautama.”
$45The Bhagavān answered:
“I do not transgress the path;I remain without contradiction and, moreover,Bring discordant beings into harmony.That is how you should understand it, child.”
$46The child asked:
“If those beings are not perceived,Then to whom, Gautama, are you bringing harmony?When you look at the past of phenomena—To whom has affliction arisen?”
$47The Bhagavān answered:
“Having comprehended the past, the future,And likewise what transpires right now,Having realized sacred awakening,I teach the Dharma to living creatures.”
$48The child said:
“You proclaim yourself the perfect Buddha,And proclaim your own understanding;Promoting yourself in this manner,Your pride must be truly exceptional!”
$49The Bhagavān answered:
“I do not laud myself,Nor do I belittle others.I clearly reveal how things truly are, And so am called the Tathāgata.” 
$50The child said:
“If how things truly are is inexpressibleAnd without a true nature,Then don’t speak contrary to your own understanding, Using terminology for what has no words, no language.”
$51The Bhagavān answered: 
“Although all those phenomena are contrary,They still arise from the natural state of things.Because I have realized how things truly are,I possess neither faults nor qualities.”#18
$52The child said: [278.b]
“Through the power#19 of the Tathāgata,My confidence has grown,And so I ask forgiveness of the perfect BuddhaFor all these answers I have requested.” 
$53Then, the Bhagavān drew his right hand, golden in color, from his Dharma robe and reached out toward the child, who took hold of the finger of the Bhagavān’s hand and stood up. The Bhagavān carried the child out of the empty house and set him down on the road.
$54The people gathered there thought, “This child was disturbed in just this way, and yet he was able to engage in such a debate regarding the qualities of the great being. The blessed buddhas truly are remarkable!” And as it was indeed remarkable, they offered sincere homage to the Bhagavān.
$55The Bhagavān then spoke the following words to the child: “Child, since your obscuration of karma has been exhausted, remember your previous roots of virtue and make them known to this great crowd of people. Show them a great miraculous feat!”
$56The child then floated up from the ground to the height of about seven persons, and from his body streamed light, which spread until it illuminated all of Śrāvastī, and the world of Jambudvīpa in its entirety.
$57The light drew the rapt attention of Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and many hundreds of thousands of other gods, all of whom in that second, in that very moment, in that instant, went to where the Bhagavān was and bowed their heads to his feet in homage. 
$58They tossed divine flowers to the Bhagavān and proclaimed: “O Bhagavān! This bodhisattva is inconceivably radiant such that he illuminates this buddhafield with light, and so he serves the welfare of innumerable beings!” 
$59That is how that child came to be named Inconceivable Radiance. The Bhagavān also said, [279.a] “Let this child be called Inconceivable Radiance,” and so he rejoiced in that name for the child.
$60The child Inconceivable Radiance then descended from the sky and came to rest on the ground. Through the power of the Buddha and his own prior roots of virtue, what transpired next happened like this: by the time he took a seat, the child’s body had grown to that of an eight-year-old child. 
$61Then, the lord of gods Śakra presented the child with a bolt of heavenly fabric, saying, “Dear child, out of loving concern for me, wear this length of fabric. Don’t remain naked!” 
$62The child Inconceivable Radiance then spoke these words to Śakra, the lord of gods: “Kauśika, it is not by wearing lovely clothes that bodhisattvas are made beautiful, but rather their beauty comes from bearing the ornaments of Dharma. Kauśika, it may be obvious, but nonetheless, let me tell you what the ornamental clothing of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas is.#20
$63“The ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas is the awakening mind, for it adorns the seat of awakening. The ornaments of modesty and propriety are the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for they support all beings.
$64“Observing their commitments is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it perfects their insight. Their intent is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it eliminates deceit and guile.
$65“Application is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it perfects all virtuous qualities. Superior intention is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it sets them apart from all others.
$66“Absence of pride is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it perfects their wisdom. Their pursuit of Dharma and longing for Dharma are the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for these perfect their insight. [279.b]
$67“Their lack of parsimony as preceptors is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it perfects their dispassionate wisdom. Their utter disregard for all wealth is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it perfects their excellent marks and signs.
$68“Pure discipline is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for it brings their aspirations to completion. Acceptance and gentleness#21 are the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for they become words that resound and roar like the voice of Brahmā.
$69“Stable resolve and fortitude#22 are the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for these fulfill all their goals. Their attainment of concentrations, liberations, absorptions, and equilibria are the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for these perfect the wisdom of highly advanced cognition.#23
$70“The insight of knowing how to parse words carefully#24 is the ornamental clothing of the bodhisattvas, for it eliminates latent tendencies, beliefs, and manifest afflictions. Great compassion is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for they never become discouraged in saṃsāra.
$71“Bearing no animosity toward any being is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, for they never lose interest in the welfare of self and other. Teaching Dharma without material interest#25 is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, because insight liberates both self and other.
$72“Accomplishment of Dharma#26 is the ornamental clothing of bodhisattvas, since it removes all mental disturbances. Kauśika, in this way you must see how bodhisattvas who possess ornaments of Dharma like these are never naked.”
$73The lord of gods Śakra was greatly pleased with the child and trusted in him,#27 and so, addressing the Bhagavān, he asked, “Out of loving consideration for me, would the Bhagavān please tell him to accept this length of fabric?” 
$74The Bhagavān then spoke [280.a] to the child Inconceivable Radiance, saying, “Child, take this length of fabric and put it on.”
$75The child Inconceivable Radiance then went over to the Bhagavān, knelt with his right knee on the ground, pressed his palms together in salutation toward him, and then, in his presence, accepted the length of fabric and put it on.
$76The Bhagavān then went to receive alms in the town of Śrāvastī. The men and women, boys and girls, merchants and brahmins, householders, and the king and his major officials were amazed and assembled there to look upon the child Inconceivable Radiance, to look upon the Bhagavān, and to show them honor and homage. The Bhagavān accepted the offering of alms from each in turn and then went to the home of the mother of the child Inconceivable Radiance. When he arrived there, however, he said nothing and simply remained off to one side. Embarrassed, the mother of the child Inconceivable Radiance did not come out to the entrance to greet the Bhagavān.
$77The child Inconceivable Radiance went inside his home and then spoke the following verses to his mother:
“It was due to my own past misdeedsThat I entered your womb, Not because of any fault of yours, mother; That being so, don’t feel ashamed!
$78“Since you created me with love,I am the one indebted to you.Don’t be embarrassed or shy away.Come before the Tathāgata!
$79“My entry into your wombWas an endowment you received well.Come share with the Great Guide as well The virtuous deeds of your body!”
$80The child Inconceivable Radiance then spoke to the lord of gods Śakra, saying, “Kauśika, give me some heavenly mandārava flowers, divine incense, and godly raiment. I shall give them to this mother who gave birth to me. [280.b] By presenting them as a gift to the Bhagavān, she will generate the mind set on unsurpassed and perfect awakening.” 
$81And so the lord of gods Śakra gave the child heavenly mandārava flowers, divine incense, and godly raiment. The child Inconceivable Radiance then spoke the following verses to his mother:
$82“Mother, take these heavenly mandārava flowers,So lovely to behold and enjoyable,Along with this incense and clothing,And offer them to this great man, the Buddha.
$83“Gifts made in this world to one’s parents, such as food and drink,Money and clothes, are not offerings at allCompared with what connects them to Dharma;Therefore, make an offering of these items!
$84“Make an offering to this holiest of humans,And firmly aspire to supreme awakening.Time and again, I have been at your side; For so very long have I encouraged you!
$85“Without feeling unworthy or ashamed,But with a renewed sense of joy and delight,Proceed to where the genuine Victor awaits,And offer homage at the feet of this supreme being!
$86“Handing flowers over to the Lord, Along with incense and clothing, Generate the roots of virtue from that Victor,And generate too the resolve for supreme awakening!
$87“Having set your resolve for supreme awakening,Then, as is said, ‘the Lord of the World assures full maturationTo those who, with faith, pay respect to a Victor.’Go petition this genuine Victor!”#28
$88The woman then went over to the Bhagavān and offered homage by prostrating to his feet, made offerings to him, and put her request to him fully and respectfully, just as she had been instructed.
$89After she had made this request, the Bhagavān told her, “Through this accomplishment of roots of virtue you shall not go to the lower realms or an unfortunate state. Having pleased millions upon millions of buddhas, you shall yourself become a buddha, the holiest of persons.” [281.a]
$90When he had finished receiving alms in the town of Śrāvastī, the Bhagavān, accompanied by the child Inconceivable Radiance and other lay people, left the town and returned to the Jeta Grove in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park. The Bhagavān then took his meal, arose from his inner absorption, and readied himself to make the Dharma heard.
$91The king of the state of Kośala, Prasenajit, accompanied by his four military regiments, came to see the Bhagavān in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park. As he and his men arrived, they offered homage by prostrating to the Bhagavān’s feet and then sat off to one side.
$92Once they were seated at his side, the king of the state of Kośala, Prasenajit, said to the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, where is the child Inconceivable Radiance, who possesses such wondrous and amazing qualities?”
$93The Bhagavān then pointed out the child Inconceivable Radiance, and King Prasenajit could see at first sight that the child’s physical body was fully developed, with a complexion superior to that of the gods, and that he was graced with fearlessness, disciplined conduct, absorption, and insight. The king therefore thought to himself, “Imagine what kinds of deeds he must have performed and accumulated in the past to have a pure body like that!”
$94The child Inconceivable Radiance, due to the power of the Buddha and because of his own past roots of virtue, knew in his mind what King Prasenajit had thought. So he said:
$95“Those who consistently possess a loving and pure mind,Are not fractious, but gentle and thoughtful, As well as well-mannered, honest, and chaste—It is they who become pure in body.
$96“Those who abandon and abstain from wrong actions,Who never devalue but increase virtue,Who entirely reject malice and hostility— [281.b]It is they who become pure in body.
$97“Those who continually and respectfully make offeringsTo the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha#29And don’t feel aggression toward or threaten others—It is they who become pure in body.
$98“Those who are not jealous,Miserly, or otherwise prideful toward othersAnd say nothing when others’ faults arise—It is they who become pure in body.
$99“Those who never look to blame, Reproach, or rebuke others Or look for a chance to exploit them—It is they who become pure in body.”
$100King Prasenajit then said to the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, since this child Inconceivable Radiance clearly possesses such great qualities, what sort of obscuration of karma caused him to be born from the womb of a woman without a husband and later abandoned in that empty dwelling?” 
$101The Bhagavān answered him, “Great king, once, in the distant past, ninety-one eons ago, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha, the one with perfect knowledge and conduct, the blissful one, the knower of the world, the charioteer who tames beings, the unexcelled, the teacher of gods and humans, the blessed buddha known as Vipaśyin appeared in the world.
$102“Great king, in those days, at that time, there were two bodhisattvas, Divine Excellence and Earth, who attended the sublime discourses of the blessed buddha Vipaśyin. In particular, the bodhisattva known as Divine Excellence was one who would no longer regress; he had few pursuits and few activities, enjoyed solitude, and was filled with loving kindness due to his powers of concentration and advanced cognition.
$103“As for the bodhisattva known as Earth, he was not very well versed in the Dharma [282.a] and so served as the attendant of Divine Excellence. He frequently went into neighboring villages, towns, townships, and palaces and there would busy himself with many tasks and activities. Thus, the bodhisattva Divine Excellence would reprimand him, saying, ‘Why are you busying yourself with so many tasks and activities instead of putting your effort into practice and renunciation?’
$104“Over and over again Divine Excellence exhorted him, making Earth irritated and agitated, turning him unpleasant and then abusive, until he became both physically and mentally malicious. He voiced his vile thoughts in the coarsest language, saying, ‘You bastard, you son of a whore, your father was a cuckold. Since you don’t even have a proper father and mother, it is ridiculous to think that you could have insight or disciplined conduct.’ 
$105“With the worst intentions he spoke these crude words, and without confession, contrition, or rejection, he held his grudge, continuing to harbor ill will toward the bodhisattva Divine Excellence, and he had not the slightest affection for him.
$106“The bodhisattva Divine Excellence, moreover, thought that Earth was no longer a fitting vessel and withdrew from him,#30 spurring Earth to think even worse of the bodhisattva Divine Excellence and to speak to him in the most uncomplimentary, caustic, unvenerable, and unmeasured terms. 
$107“Because of the karma Earth accumulated and gathered in this way, his body was ruined, and in the wake of his death, he was reborn to a woman who gave birth to him out of wedlock. Because he had maintained the awakening mind, however, his actions did not cause him to take rebirth as a being in hell.
$108“As soon as he was born, the woman abandoned him along a major thoroughfare, where he was eaten by dogs, jackals, and wolves. Great king, in a similar fashion, over the course of ninety eons, he suffered like this, in the same miserable way; he died and was reborn and once reborn was abandoned. The common folk would say, ‘That bastard, that child of a whore—let the dogs, jackals, and wolves eat him!’
$109“Great king, if you are uncertain, if you entertain doubt as to whether the one known as the bodhisattva Earth in those days, at that time, may have been someone else, [282.b] you need not wonder any longer. If you ask, ‘Why is that?’ Well, it is because this child Inconceivable Radiance was the one known in those days, at that time, as the bodhisattva Earth.
$110“Great king, his obscuration of karma has now been exhausted. His impure mind has been purified. He has pleased the Tathāgata. Cutting off rebirth in all the lower realms, this child Inconceivable Radiance has pleased sixty-four million buddhas, has honored them, venerated them, and revered them, and has conducted himself with sanctity before them. He has been diligent in the dedicated pursuit of Dharma as well.
$111“Great king, through his past roots of virtue, he has achieved this illustrious state. Great king, in this way, black deeds and white deeds are never squandered. Great king, since that is the case, the wise are circumspect about their physical, verbal, and mental acts, abstaining from evil even at the cost of their lives.”
$112The king of the state of Kośala, Prasenajit, then asked the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, the bodhisattva who was called Divine Excellence—did he ever attain unsurpassed and perfect awakening? Or is he still, even now, engaging in the conduct of a bodhisattva?”
$113The Bhagavān answered him, “Great king, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Divine Excellence conducts himself with sanctity in the buddha realm of the tathāgata Akṣobhya, where he is known as the bodhisattva mahāsattva Śrīsambhava.”
$114The king of Kośala, Prasenajit, then said to the Bhagavān: “Bhagavān, a noble son or daughter is supposed to act respectfully, to serve spiritual masters, to attend them, and to venerate them. One may ask, ‘What is the value of doing so?’ 
$115“Bhagavān, if one attends, serves, and venerates a spiritual master, one acquires virtuous qualities. [283.a] Through acquiring virtuous qualities, one’s frame of mind becomes virtuous. When one’s frame of mind is virtuous, one trains in virtue.#31
$116“Through training in virtue, one performs virtuous deeds. Through virtuous deeds, one will have a virtuous existence. Due to a virtuous existence, one enjoys virtuous companions. In virtuous company, sinful acts are not performed. One will not engage in sinful acts.#32
$117“By abstaining from sinful acts and engaging in virtue, one will not be tormented, and others will not be tormented. Through affording protection to oneself and others, the path to awakening will be completed.
$118“By staying on the path to awakening, one will have the ability and opportunity to effectively serve the welfare of beings who have embarked on inferior paths.”
$119The Bhagavān remarked, “Great king, well said! Well said! You have spoken well! Great king, by serving one’s spiritual master, one will perfect all the qualities that characterize a bodhisattva mahāsattva.”
$120The child Inconceivable Radiance then said to the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, what are the various qualities a bodhisattva should possess in order to swiftly awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood and to gain acceptance of even the most profound Dharmas?”
$121The Bhagavān responded, “Child, a bodhisattva who possesses four qualities will swiftly awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood and gain acceptance of even the most profound Dharmas. What are these four?
$122 “They are comprehension of interdependence; rejection of eternalism and nihilism; the understanding that there are no beings, no living creatures,#33 and no persons; and an interest in and experience of emptiness.
$123“A bodhisattva who possesses these four qualities will swiftly awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood [283.b] and gain acceptance of even the most profound Dharmas.
$124“Child, in addition, a bodhisattva who possesses four other qualities will swiftly awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. What are these four?
$125“Leaving the past behind, not projecting into the future, knowing how to extinguish what arises right now, and knowing the sameness of the three times—those are the four. 
$126“There is yet another set of four. What are the four? Physical isolation, mental isolation, isolation from phenomena, and isolation from action—those are the four.
$127“There are another four. What are they? Seeing the Buddha as reality itself and not as a form; seeing the Dharma as detachment from desire and not as terms and definitions; seeing the saṅgha as noncomposite and not as an assemblage; and purification of the eyes of insight—those are the four.#34
$128“There are four more. What are they? They are perfecting the six transcendent virtues by not relinquishing the modes of attraction; expertise in insight and skillful means; precise discernment that there are no beings; and great compassion.
$129“Child, a bodhisattva who possesses these four qualities will swiftly awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood and gain acceptance of even the most profound Dharmas.”
$130As the Bhagavān gave this teaching presenting the fourfold attainments, the child Inconceivable Radiance gained acceptance of the fact that phenomena do not arise and was so joyous, so overjoyed, that he himself actually floated up into the sky to the height of seven palm trees. At that point, the Bhagavān smiled.
$131As is the nature of things when blessed buddhas smile, lights of various colors radiated from the mouth of the Bhagavān. The lights appeared in many different colors, such as blue, yellow, red, white, violet, and silver. Those multicolored lights illuminated the [284.a] infinite and boundless worlds of the universe, manifesting even as far as Brahmā’s domain and making the very sun and moon seem lackluster. The lights then reversed course and vanished into the crown of the Bhagavān’s head. 
$132Venerable Ānanda then rose from his seat, draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee. Joining his palms, he bowed toward the Bhagavān. In the rhythm of verse, he requested an explanation of the meaning of this from the Bhagavān:
$133“Your figure is lovely and worthy to behold,Gracefully adorned with marks and signs most fine,And shining beautifully within a circle of lights.#35Please explain your smile to me!
$134“You are engaged in exemplary conduct with superior discipline,And with the light of wisdom gathered from absorption and insight,#36And the strength of the essence of liberation, you see perfectly.Please explain your smile to me!
$135“With the strength of the power of acceptance#37And diligence eminently superior and unwavering,You are pleasing to the eye and behold the four truths.Please explain your smile to me!
$136“You have a vajra body, hard, stable, and indestructible,As mighty as Nārāyaṇa—even greater than Nārāyaṇa.#38Your voice is gentle, the sweet voice of Brahmā.Please explain your smile to me!
$137“Brahmā and likewise the other gods who have gatheredBehold you with reverence, yet even though the Tathāgata is seatedThey cannot see the summit of your crown.Please explain your smile to me!
$138“You turn the sacred wheel of Dharma.The message of impermanence deeply movesGods, asuras, nāgas, and yakṣas alike.Please explain your smile to me!#39
$139“You have discovered#40 radiance and removed all darkness,You abide in equanimity with eyes that take in all,Possess superior qualities, and display essential qualities.#41Please explain your smile to me!” [284.b]
$140With those words he made his request. The Bhagavān then answered the venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, do you see the child Inconceivable Radiance hovering in the space above, at the height of seven palm trees?” 
Ānanda replied, “Yes, Bhagavān, I do see him.”
$141The Bhagavān said, “Ānanda, this bodhisattva mahāsattva Inconceivable Radiance, after one hundred incalculable eons, in the eon called Universal Illumination, in the realm known as Fully Cleansed,#42#43 will make his appearance in the world as the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha, the one with knowledge and good conduct, the blissful one, the knower of the world, the charioteer who tames beings, the unexcelled, the teacher of gods and humans known precisely as the blessed buddha Inconceivable Radiance.
$142“Ānanda, that realm Fully Cleansed will become utterly pure in the following way: as a comparison, it will be like what is enjoyed and experienced by the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods. That tathāgata will remain there for twenty intermediate eons. He will have a saṅgha of eighty thousand listeners. There will be a bodhisattva saṅgha of thirty-two thousand.
$143“Ānanda, you may wonder why that realm will be called Fully Cleansed and the eon Universal Illumination. Ānanda, over the course of hundreds and thousands of prior intermediate eons, no tathāgata ever appears in that buddhafield. It is there that Inconceivable Radiance, the Tathāgata, will appear; it is there where the Śuddhāvāsa gods say, ‘This eon lacks universal illumination. It lacks universal illumination, so may a tathāgata appear!’ His appearance is due to their giving voice to this purposeful interjection.”
$144When this statement of prophecy about the bodhisattva Inconceivable Radiance was spoken, [285.a] and this account of Dharma was taught, thirty-two thousand beings, gods and humans alike, generated the mind set on unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Sixty bodhisattvas developed acceptance of the fact that phenomena do not arise. Five hundred listeners completely freed their minds from defilement, without any further grasping.
$145The Bhagavān then said to venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, you must retain my sacred Dharma. For the benefit of present bodhisattvas, and for those yet to come, you must retain this account of Dharma.”
$146Ānanda replied, “Bhagavān, when I retain this account of Dharma, what is the name of this account of Dharma? How shall it be remembered?”
The Bhagavān said, “Retain it as The Cleansing of the Obscurations of Karma and The Buddha’s Pageantry and The Teaching by Inconceivable Radiance. 
$147“Ānanda, some people may spend their entire lives respecting, revering, venerating, and worshiping all the tathāgatas, offering them ground floral incense strewn as high as Mount Meru, as well as fragrances, powders, balms, robes, parasols, victory banners, and pennants, and also many other varieties of divine and human offerings. Compared to them, a noble son or daughter who retains and reads this account of Dharma taught by Inconceivable Radiance, who fully comprehends it and makes it widely and perfectly known to others, and who likewise assiduously applies it—such a person generates a vastly greater collection of merit.
$148“Ānanda, since that is the case, those who wish to honor the Tathāgata with the offering of Dharma and those who wish to create the great radiance of insight should retain this account of Dharma, read it, accomplish it with diligence, and make it widely and perfectly known to others.”
$149When the Bhagavān had spoken these words, the venerable Ānanda, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Inconceivable Radiance, the king of Kośala, Prasenajit, along with his entourage, the lord of gods Śakra, the master of the Sahā world system Brahmā, and the four guardians of the world, along with everyone else in attendance as well as the gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas of this world, rejoiced and greatly extolled what the Bhagavān had said.
$150This completes the noble account of Dharma, [285.b] “The Teaching by the Child Inconceivable Radiance.”
Colophon
$151The Indian preceptor Surendrabodhi and the chief translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé translated, corrected, and finalized this text.#44
