
The Noble Dharma Discourse
Describing the Benefits of Producing Representations of the Thus-Gone One
Describing the Benefits of Producing Representations of the Thus-Gone One
$1 [197.a] Homage to the Omniscient One. 
$2 Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was residing in the Jeta Grove in Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park at Śrāvastī. 
At that time a large number of monks had gathered in the assembly hall and started the following conversation: “Faithful brahmins or householders who remember what they are taught and have become increasingly learned may ask you how to practice virtue. There may also be some who delight in producing representations of the Thus-Gone One, who will come before us and inquire, ‘Respected ones, may we know how much benefit there is for donors when they produce a representation of the Thus-Gone One?’ How can we then respond to them in accordance with the Dharma when we do not know how much benefit results from producing a representation of the Thus-Gone One? We should ask the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha—the omniscient, all-seeing teacher who eliminates all doubts—about this point. Once the Blessed One teaches us, we will comprehend it and can then explain it at length and respond to those faithful brahmins and householders.” 
$3 Then that large number of monks went to the place where the Blessed One was staying, prostrated themselves at the Blessed One’s feet, sat to one side, [197.b] and asked the Buddha the following: “Respected One, a large number of us monks just had the following conversation when we gathered in the assembly hall: ‘Faithful brahmins or householders who remember what they are taught and have become increasingly learned may ask us how to practice virtue. There may also be some who delight in producing representations of the Thus-Gone One, who will come before us and inquire, “Respected ones, may we know how much benefit there is for donors when they commission a representation of the Thus-Gone One?” How can we then respond to them in accordance with the Dharma when we do not know how much benefit results from producing a representation of the Thus-Gone One? We should ask the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha—the omniscient, all-seeing teacher who eliminates all doubts—about this point. Once the Blessed One teaches us, we will comprehend it and can then explain it at length and respond to those faithful brahmins and householders.’ Respected Blessed One, since we have come to you asking about these matters, may we know how much benefit there is for donors when they produce a representation of the Thus-Gone One?” 
$4 The Blessed One replied, “Monks, you have asked this to bring benefit to many beings, to bring happiness to many beings and out of compassion for them, and to bring benefit and happiness to gods and humans. You have thought to ask for clarification from the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha. Excellent! Excellent! For that reason, monks, listen to me very carefully, pay attention, [198.a] and I will teach you.
$5 “Monks, a donor who produces a representation of the Thus-Gone One will enjoy the following five benefits:
“One will live in a great palace, be regarded as fortunate, be free of poverty,#6 and have great joy, longevity, fame, and happiness. Monks, this is the first benefit for a donor who produces representations of the Thus-Gone One. 
$6 “One will also have riches, abundant wealth, prosperity, property, and many belongings. One will be self-sufficient and have many cherished possessions such as a great number of livestock, grain, jewels, gold, treasuries, and storerooms; many horses, elephants, oxen, sheep, male and female servants, employees, and laborers; and many ministers, friends, relatives, and kin. Monks, this is the second benefit for a donor who produces representations of the Thus-Gone One.
$7 “Monks, one will also have a beautiful body, a pleasant appearance, elegance, a golden complexion,#7 a head that is round like a parasol, long arms, a broad forehead, unbroken eyebrows, a perfect set of limbs and extremities, and be adorned with all sorts of ornaments. Monks, this is the third benefit for a donor who produces representations of the Thus-Gone One.
$8 “Monks, one will also become a universal emperor who has a fine retinue, the seven royal treasures, and is surrounded by one thousand sons. All of one’s sons, wives, servants, and caretakers will listen respectfully and follow one’s commands. Monks, this is the fourth benefit for a donor [198.b] who produces representations of the Thus-Gone One. 
$9 “Moreover, monks, after passing away, one will take a favorable rebirth among the gods in the heavenly realms. After being born there, one will become an excellent king of the gods who will be venerated by the gods and goddesses. One will enjoy ten states: divine lifespan, divine complexion, divine power, divine happiness, divine lordship, and divine form, sound, smell, taste, and touch. Monks, this is the fifth benefit for a donor who produces representations of the Thus-Gone One.”
$10 When the Blessed One had said this, the monks rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words and praised him.
$11 Thus concludes The Noble Dharma Discourse “Teaching#8 the Benefits of Producing Representations of the Thus-Gone One.”
Colophon
{{milestone:{label:c.1,id:UT22084-072-020-34}}}This work was translated by the Indian preceptor Dharmākara and the translator Bandé Yeshé Nyingpo. It was then revised and finalized by Bandé Paltsek.
