
The Chapter on the Scale of Life
The Chapter on the Scale of Life
$1 [393.b]
It was then that the bodhisattva King of Mind addressed those bodhisattvas: “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in this Sahā world, the buddhafield of the blessed Thus-Gone One Śākyamuni, is but a single day in Sukhāvatī, the buddhafield of the Thus-Gone One Amitāyus. [394.a]
$2 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in Sukhāvatī is but a single day in the realm of Kaṣāyadhvajā, the buddhafield of the Thus-Gone One Vajrapramardin.
$3 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in the realm of Kaṣāyadhvajā is but a single day in the realm of Avaivartika­cakra­nirghoṣā, the buddhafield of the Thus-Gone One Padma­phullitagātra. 
$4 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in the realm of Avaivartika­cakra­nirghoṣā is but a single day in the realm of Virajā, the buddhafield of the blessed Thus-Gone One Dharmadhvaja. 
$5 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in the realm of Virajā is but a single day in the realm of Excellent Lamp, the buddhafield of the blessed Thus-Gone One Siṃha.
$6 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in the realm of Excellent Lamp is but a single day in the realm of Suprabhā, the buddhafield of the blessed Thus-Gone One Vairocana­garbha. 
$7 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in the realm of Suprabhā is but a single day in the realm of Duratikramā, the buddhafield of the blessed Thus-Gone One Lotus Body Blooming from the Light of the Dharma.
$8 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in the realm of Duratikramā is [394.b] but a single day in the realm of Vyūhā, the buddhafield of the blessed Thus-Gone One Light of All Supernatural Abilities.
$9 “O children of the Victorious One, the extent of an eon in the realm of Vyūhā is but a single day in the realm of Color of the Mirror Disk, the buddhafield of the blessed Thus-Gone One Candrabuddhi. 
$10 “O children of the Victorious One, continuing with this system for calculating eons and traversing tens of thousands of countless realms, we arrive at the equivalent of a single day in the realm of Padmaśrī, the buddhafield where the blessed Thus-Gone One Bhadraśrī resides.
$11 “According to this system of calculation, all realms are brimming with bodhisattvas who follow the conduct of Samantabhadra.”
$12 This was “The Scale of Life,” the thirty-seventh chapter of the extensive sūtra, the Ornaments of the Buddhas.
