
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra
The Exposition on the Universal Gateway
The Translation
$1[184.b][185.a] Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was staying at Vulture Peak Mountain by Rājagṛha, together with a great saṅgha of eight hundred monks, and with forty-two thousand bodhisattvas. At that time, a bodhisattva great being by the name Amalagarbha, accompanied by ninety-two thousand other bodhisattvas, set out from the world known as Immaculate Conduct—the buddhafield of the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Saṃkusumita. They traveled to Vulture Peak Mountain, here in this Sahā world, where the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni dwelled. 
$2As the bodhisattva great being Amalagarbha arrived in the sky, surrounded and attended by a great assembly of bodhisattvas, the Blessed One noticed him. As he caught sight of him, the Blessed One thought, “The bodhisattva great being Amalagarbha has been dispatched here by the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Saṃkusumita in order to receive the Dharma teaching called The Exposition on the Universal Gateway. Therefore, I, for my part, should gather the bodhisattvas.” Then, because the Blessed One formed this intent, all bodhisattva great beings residing in boundless, infinite worlds#7 arrived at Vulture Peak Mountain here in this Sahā world to meet the Blessed One. 
$3Upon arrival, they bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat down to one side. [185.b] All the bodhisattva great beings at Vulture Peak Mountain who had retired for meditation#8 also gathered. The bodhisattva great being Amalagarbha then went before the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni, holding a thousand-petaled lotus flower made of the seven precious substances. He bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet and offered him the thousand-petaled lotus. 
$4Amalagarbha then said to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Saṃkusumita from the world Immaculate Conduct inquiries about the Blessed One’s health. Does the Blessed One have but little trouble, grief, and agitation?#9 Is he in good health, strong, and at ease? Is the Blessed One free of illness and does he have but few troubles?” When he had thus inquired after the Blessed One’s health, he added, “Might the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni deliver the Dharma teaching pertaining to the inconceivable Exposition on the Universal Gateway to the bodhisattva great beings?” Then, having asked the Blessed One in this way, the bodhisattva great being Amalagarbha sat down cross-legged in the sky in the midst of his retinue of bodhisattvas.
$5At that time, Prince Mañjuśrī was also present within that assembly.#10 He rose from his seat, draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee. Joining his palms, he bowed toward the Blessed One and said, “In order to foster the bodhisattvas, I request the Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, to thoroughly expound the Dharma teaching pertaining to the inconceivable Exposition on the Universal Gateway. Blessed One, [186.a] I beseech you. In the past, I received this teaching from the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Bright Lamp and thereby developed eighty-four sextillion absorptions. I also understood seventy-seven sextillion approaches to accomplishing dhāraṇīs. That being the case, may the Blessed One also teach this thoroughly in order to foster these bodhisattvas.” 
$6In response, the Blessed One said the following to Prince Mañjuśrī: “To this effect, Mañjuśrī, listen carefully and keep in mind what I explain.” 
Prince Mañjuśrī answered, “Blessed One, so be it.”#11
$7He listened closely as the Blessed One said, “Mañjuśrī, bodhisattva great beings should understand form to be absorption. They should understand sound to be absorption. They should understand scent to be absorption. They should understand taste to be absorption. They should understand tactile objects to be absorption. They should understand the objects of the mind to be absorption.
$8“They should understand women’s figures#12 to be absorption. They should understand men’s figures#13 to be absorption. They should understand boys’ figures to be absorption. They should understand girls’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the gods’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the nāgas’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the yakṣas’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the gandharvas’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the asuras’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the garuḍas’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the kiṃnaras’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the mahoragas’ figures to be absorption. They should understand the hell beings’ figures to be absorption. They should understand animals’ figures to be absorption. [186.b] They should understand the figures of beings in the world of the Lord of Death to be absorption. 
$9“They should understand attachment to be absorption. They should understand anger to be absorption. They should understand ignorance to be absorption. They should understand all virtues to be absorption. They should understand all nonvirtues to be absorption. They should understand all conditioned phenomena to be absorption. They should understand all unconditioned phenomena to be absorption. In this manner, they should understand all phenomena to be absorption. Mañjuśrī, bodhisattva great beings who obtain all such absorptions have omnipresent minds and are trained in the Dharma teaching of The Exposition on the Universal Gateway. 
$10“Mañjuśrī, in this regard, how should bodhisattvas understand form to be absorption? 
“Form is said to be like a bubble: Its essence cannot be found. Since it is essenceless and cannot be grasped,I have taught it to be absorption. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how one should understand form to be absorption. 
$11“Mañjuśrī, in this regard, how should bodhisattvas understand sound to be absorption? 
“Sound is like an echo:It has no substance.I know it to have no distinguishable parts And to be devoid of characteristics, with no particularities. 
$12“It has no characteristics or origin,And is hollow and unconditioned. Knowing it#14 to be like an echo,I have taught it to be absorption. 
“Mañjuśrī, that is how you should understand sound to be absorption. 
$13“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand scent to be absorption? 
“Just as the bottom of the ocean Can never be reached in any way, You could smell for ten million eons, But there would still be no satisfying the nose. 
$14“The olfactory cognition cannot be apprehended;It is deceiving and nonexistent. Were it to be real, It could rapidly be contented.
$15“Since it is imperceptible and unreal, The nose is known to be nonexistent and hollow.#15Knowing it to be void and empty, [187.a]I have taught it to be absorption. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand scent to be absorption. 
$16“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand taste to be absorption? 
“The tongue is neither pungent nor bitter; It is neither sour nor salty.The tongue just changes in accordanceWith the conditions it encounters.
$17Taste is known to arise through causes#16And in dependence on conditions. Knowing it to be inconceivable,I have taught it to be absorption. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand taste to be absorption.
$18“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand tactile objects to be absorption? 
“Tactile objects, which arise out of cognition, Are not inherently existent. Softness#17 and roughness Are created by conditions. 
$19“Tactile objects are baseless; Their way of abiding is devoid of self. Knowing them to be a combination of composite factors, I have taught them to be absorption. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand tactile objects to be absorption. 
$20“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand objects of the mind to be absorption? 
“Beings of the trichiliocosm All dwell in the same condition.#18Though they cognize the range of mental objects, They cannot find their substance. 
$21“That which is aggregated and amassed Has no basis in cognition.Though cognition displays various colors, These exist neither outside nor inside. 
$22“Mental objects do not abide and have no basis. Like an illusion, they are insubstantial. Knowing them to be nonexistent and hollow, I have taught them to be absorption. 
“Mañjuśrī, that is how you should understand mental objects to be absorption. 
$23“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand the female figure to be absorption? 
“Though women do not exist Within the four major elements,The immature, with their confused minds,Engage in trifling desires.
$24“Though illusory women are without marks,They appear as the female figure.Those men who are enclosed in darkness [187.b]Give rise to strong attachment toward them.
$25“While they give rise to desirous thoughtsRegarding illusory women,These women are nonexistent.#19
$26“It is this mistaken mindThat has made the simple-mindedCircle around for countless eons.
$27“Therefore, if you know insubstantiality,All women are without characteristics.This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to the female figure. 
“Mañjuśrī, that is how you should understand the female figure to be absorption. 
$28“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand the male figure to be absorption? 
“When men declare:‘This is a woman and I am a man,’In that instant, their mindsBecome desirous and mistaken.
$29“Yet mind is formless#20 and imperceptible.It is indemonstrable as woman or man.It is conceptual superimpositionsThat give rise to the perception of man.#21
$30“Men declare: ‘This is a woman and I am a man.’Yet all such imputed notionsI have taught to be like a mirage,And no man exists therein.
$31“Since the nature of man is illusory,He has arisen out of nonexistence.This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to the male figure. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand the male figure to be absorption.
$32“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand boys’ figures to be absorption? 
“If there is no sapling,How can a flower appear? If there is no flower,The fruit cannot grow either.
$33“Likewise, since women are nonexistent,Boys cannot be apprehended either. Those who are under the sway of their imaginations,Falsely conceive#22 what they call boy. 
$34“If you know woman to be unborn,Boys have no origin either.Realizing all entities to be nonexistent,I have taught boys to be absorption. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand boys’ figures to be absorption.
$35“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas [188.a] understand girls’ figures to be absorption? 
“If a palm tree’s crown is cut off,It can never grow again.Knowing this, the wiseWill not wish for any fruits to appear.
$36“Likewise, once the wise know that womenHave also never been born,They no longer wrongly think,‘Their basis,#23 a girl, has been born.’
$37“Knowing that when a seed is parched It can no longer grow,This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to girls’ figures. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand girls’ figures to be absorption.
$38“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand gods’ figures to be absorption? 
“Gods are the result of virtuous actionProduced by virtuous thoughts.Pure minds causeThe manifestation of beautiful gods.
$39“Their delightful palacesAre not created by anyone else.The mandārava flower tooIs not made by anyone else.
$40“Produced by illusory action,These appearances are inconceivable. The beautiful glitter of beryl gemsIs also false and untrue.
$41“Knowing that gods manifest in an unreal mannerAnd are therefore unreal,This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to the gods’ figures. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand gods’ figures to be absorption. 
$42“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand nāgas’ figures to be absorption? 
“By becoming intolerant,They manifest the forms of nonexistent clouds.Although they do not remain in those clouds,They bring down heavy rainfall.
$43“They fill up the seas,Rivers,#24 and oceans here in Jambudvīpa.Yet, whether in the beginning or the end,This water is devoid of origin.
$44“All beings are similar to that water— They are skilled in various undertakingsAnd display various karmic actions,But these karmic actions have no origin.
$45“The wise know these illusions, [188.b]Which delude the immature, to be unarisen.Thus, since the untrue appears as true,I have taught nāgas to be absorption.
“Mañjuśrī, that is how you should understand nāgas’ figures to be absorption. 
$46“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand yakṣas’ figures to be absorption? 
“From the transformation of the mindManifests a terrifying figure.Though its body may be great,It was created by a single mind.
$47“Fear does not exist within the mind;It appears from a combination of factors.Look at the inconceivable array of hideous forms#25Arising out of nonexistent action!
$48“Knowing this inconceivable array of hideous formsTo be utterly empty,#26This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to the yakṣas’ figures. 
“Mañjuśrī, that is how you should understand yakṣas’ figures to be absorption.
$49“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand gandharvas’ figures to be absorption?
“Though these phenomena are devoid of any going,They are given the name of wanderers.Knowing wanderers to go nowhere,I have taught absorption with reference to gandharvas.#27
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand gandharvas’ figures to be absorption.
$50“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand asuras’ figures to be absorption? 
“The asura, sealed with the letter a,#28Truly arises from the unborn.Since they are unceasing and non-arising,Absorption is taught with reference to the asuras.#29
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand asuras’ figures to be absorption.
$51“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand garuḍas’ figures to be absorption?
“Grasping onto the ungraspable,#30We apply labels as we speak.Since neither name nor form are existent,I have taught absorption with reference to the garuḍas.
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand garuḍas’ figures to be absorption.
$52“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand kiṃnaras’ figures to be absorption?
“It is by uncreated, created actions [189.a]That the kiṃnaras are produced.#31Knowing them to be unborn, I have taught absorption with reference to the kiṃnaras. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand the kiṃnaras’ figures to be absorption.
$53“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand mahoragas’ figures to be absorption?
“By whatever names these phenomenaAre variously posited#32 in the worlds,The phenomena do not exist there;Everything is imagined out of nonexistence.
$54“If you know everything to be fabricated,There are naturally no concepts.This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to the mahoragas’ figures. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand mahoragas’ figures to be absorption.
$55“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand the hell beings’ figures to be absorption?
“Stainless, pure, and hollow,They have no maker whatsoever.They are produced by their own thoughts,Which have no existence either.
$56“Hell is clean, immaculate,Pure, true, and luminous.It is beyond all characteristics and marks,Like the seat of awakening—thus I know. 
$57“Knowing hell to be beyond attributes and unarisen,Similar to the sky,This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to the hell beings’ figures. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand hell beings’ figures to be absorption.
$58“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand figures in the animal realm to be absorption?
“For instance, cloud formationsAppear in various colors;Though the clouds have no real color,They fool the unwise. 
$59“Likewise, since the mind does not existIt is like the form of a cloud:In the realms of animals,It displays bodies in various forms.
$60“Karmic actions#33 are of an illusory nature.I know them to be unarisen and beyond characteristics.This statement on the peace of absorptionI have made with reference to animals’ figures. 
“Mañjuśrī, [189.b] this is how you should understand figures in the animal realm to be absorption.
$61“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand the figures in the world of the Lord of Death to be absorption?
“Black misdeeds and objectionable deeds And white irreproachable deedsHave all become mixed up In terms of the best, the middling, and the worst. 
$62“Then, in the world of the Lord of Death,Beings suffer and spin around in confusion.#34Yet there is no realm of the Lord of Death—It is inherently empty.
$63“Like experiences in a dream,It is without beginning or completion.Since the realm of the Lord of Death is nonexistent,I have taught it to be absorption.
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand the figures in the world of the Lord of Death to be absorption. 
$64“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand desire to be absorption? 
“Desire surges from the imagination;Those fancies too are unarisen.That which has no arising has no abiding—Its location can never be determined.
$65“Since it does not abide and has no location,Desire is like the sky.Yet immature defiled beingsImagine it to be affliction. 
$66“This phenomenon, which knows no affliction,Is then designated by the word desire.Were one to search in all ten directions,One would not find its substance.
$67“This insubstantial desireIs feared by confused, childish beings.Those who fear where there is no dangerCan know no happiness. 
$68“For instance, some peopleMight perceive the sky as something frightening.Terrified, they will run away, exclaiming,‘I must not see the sky!’
$69“Yet, since space is omnipresent,No one can be free from it.Corrupted, immature beingsImagine it falsely.
$70“Thus, childish beings who do not knowPhenomena to be like the skyYearn to rid themselvesOf insubstantial desire.
$71“Since desire is like the skyNo one can be freed from it.Perfectly freed and liberated, [190.a]Phenomena are like nirvāṇa.
$72“The buddhas of the past,The guides of the present,And the perfect buddhas yet to comeAll have desire as their domain of experience.
$73“When you have known desire to be empty,There is no deliverance from it whatsoever.It is those who perceive desire as something frighteningWho think they must free themselves from it.
$74“Being a limit of nothing whatsoever,The limit of desire is luminosity.As it is without characteristics, permanent, and sameness#35—I see it as the seat of awakening.
$75“Beings who perceive it as existentAim to diminish desire.Imagining the nonexistent,They imagine its abandonment.
$76“ ‘I must abandon desire’—Giving rise to such a conception,They would speak of its abandonment;But such is these beings’ mere conception.
$77“The limit of desire defies thoughtAnd is indestructible.Thus it is equal to the limit of reality. So, do not think#36 of being freed from it!
$78“If one were freed from desire,One would be freed from emptiness. Desire and emptinessAre not two separate things.
$79“In this way, these beings imagine#37The birth of the unborn. Therefore, to such immature beings whose consciousness is dualistic,I have taught abandonment.
$80“Since it is unborn, Desire is just a label.Names have no desire,And no one at all is attached to a name.
$81“Knowing desire to be without attachment,And seeing it as limitless emptiness,The wise do not see liberationAs a way to eliminate desire.
$82“Knowing that desire is like the qualities of awakening,And like nirvāṇa, I have taught immaculate#38 absorption#39With reference to the word desire.
$83“Desire rests on the sphere of peace.Knowing it to be complete peace,To the wise ones I have taught Absorption with reference to the word desire.
“Mañjuśrī, this is how bodhisattvas should understand desire [190.b] to be absorption. 
$84“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand anger to be absorption?
“As anger comes from rejecting,It is also an affliction born from conditions.This self, which has arisen from a lack of self,Comes about through the aggregation of many things.#40
$85“Anger at harsh wordsComes about like lethal poison.Words are simply the nature of sound And therefore completely nonexistent.
$86“For instance, fire is kindled through the meetingOf the grinding stick and grinding support.Without these materials coming together, Fire cannot be. 
$87“Likewise, from unpleasant wordsArises vain anger;But if you examine these hollow#41 words,You will find no anger there.
$88“Anger does not come from words.It does not reside inside,Nor does anger arise from the outside—#42Since it is without origination, it is hollow. 
$89“The coming together of causesIs the source of anger.If the causes come apart, Anger is nowhere to be found.
$90“People may seekCurd and milk, churn it with a stick, And create the conditionsFor butter to appear.
$91“Likewise, unpleasant wordsAre sources of hollow anger: Because of their illusions, The unwise get fired up about them.
$92“Knowing anger to be caused by imputation,And therefore utterly insubstantial,I have made this statement on the peace of absorptionWith reference to the word anger. 
$93“Knowing anger to be equal to the limit of reality,Rooted in suchness,#43And similar to the realm of phenomena,I have taught about absorption.
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand anger to be absorption.
$94“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand delusion to be absorption?
“Delusion comes from ignorance;Ignorance too is nonexistent.Where there is no delusion,There can be no confusion.
$95“Beings confuse what is without confusion,And perceive attachment where there is none.#44This is just like a childish being [191.a]Vainly trying to tie a knot in space.
$96“Labeling#45 nonexistent phenomenaAs defilements:This [problem] of childish beings is outrageous. It is indeed the most heinous of evil deeds.
$97“Just as someoneMay examine the skyFor ten million eonsAnd find no aggregates in it—
$98“Likewise, due to confusion The origin of immature beings is inconceivable.Ignorance does not heap up—It cannot fill anything up.
$99“One may try to measure the sky,But it has no beginning.The sky cannot be filled by anything:It is immeasurable.
$100“Likewise, for thousands of eonsBeings have been filled with#46 ignorance;Still, they are never being filled,And they are never satisfied in the slightest.
$101“When a person who uses a bellowFirst empties it, expelling its air, andHaving compressed it, opens it up again,Nothing is to be found inside it.
$102“Likewise, desire is like a bellow:Those who act out of delusionCan never find satisfaction,But only pursue further desires.
$103“Ignorance is said to be nonexistent:It is uprooted and insubstantial,Rootless and without location; Therefore, ignorance is inexhaustible.
$104“Since ignorance is inexhaustible,#47Its end cannot be found. Therefore, I cannot make it disappearFor all sentient beings.
$105“To make an analogy,Even if I were to remain aliveFor inconceivably many tens of millions of eonsAnd every single day
$106“Cause as many beings as there are in a trichiliocosmTo pass into nirvāṇa,Though I may succeed in this,The realms of beings would still not be depleted. 
$107“Created by ignorance, The realms of beings are without marks.Ignorance is like an illusion,And its end can therefore not be found.
$108“Since Buddha is the same as ignorance,I have taught that they are no different.It is confused, childish beingsWho have given me the name Buddha.#48
$109“Omniscience and ignorance are the same;All ignorance is nonexistent.Ignorance is the same as all beings,And all beings are inconceivable. [191.b]
$110“Inconceivability and ignoranceAre thus imputed by thought. All of the mind#49 is inconceivable,And has no limit.
$111“Since ignorance is immeasurable,One cannot find its origin. Without an origin,How can it arise?
$112“If ignorance is unborn,How could it ever cause confusion?How could it ever cause confusionIs how it also is with all buddhas.#50
$113“Knowing that they are neither different nor separate, And that all phenomena are nondual,I made this statement on the peace of absorptionWith reference to the word ignorance.
$114“When I came to know sameness,I [understood] that ignorance was the same as it.#51Knowing all of these to be the same,Understand absorption accordingly.
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand ignorance to be absorption.
$115“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand all nonvirtues to be absorption?
“The features of being desirous,And the turbulence of being angry,As well as being ignorant—Know them all to be absorption.
$116“The production#52 of any affliction#53Is absorption—be confident of that!Afflictions are false and unreal;Meditate on them all in this way.
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand all nonvirtues to be absorption.
$117“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand all virtues to be absorption?
“Whatever virtues beings may have,And howsoever their minds and conduct may be,All conduct is but one conduct;Know absorption to be like this!
$118“Knowing the conduct of all beingsTo be but one performance,#54I have made this statement on the peace of absorptionWith reference to the word all.#55
“Mañjuśrī, in this way, you should understand all virtues to be absorption.
$119“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand all conditioned phenomena to be absorption?
“Formations are not formations.In terms of numerical estimation, They are uncountable and immeasurable—Know absorption to be so.
$120“Knowing formations to be immeasurable, [192.a]Without body or substance,I have made this statement on the peace of absorptionWith reference to all formations. 
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand all conditioned phenomena to be absorption.
$121“Mañjuśrī, how should bodhisattvas understand all unconditioned phenomena to be absorption?
“Since this Dharma is naturally peaceful,It is beyond number. I have taught that peace formed by ignoranceIs formed by absorption.
$122“Knowing everything conditioned to be inexpressibleAnd uncreated,I have taught suchTo all beings who are attached to words.
“Mañjuśrī, this is how you should understand all unconditioned phenomena to be absorption.” 
$123As he completed these verses, thus delivering this inconceivable teaching, ninety-two thousand bodhisattvas gained the acceptance of phenomena being unborn. Seventy-two sextillion gods formed the resolve to attain unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Thirty-six thousand monks liberated their minds from the defilements, without further appropriation. Six thousand two hundred nuns also formed the resolve to achieve unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Eight million one hundred thousand male lay practitioners formed the resolve to achieve unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Four million two hundred thousand female lay practitioners also formed the resolve to reach unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
$124Then Prince Mañjuśrī said to the Blessed One, “If those bodhisattvas with sharp faculties who have come here hear the names of some absorptions, they will attain illumination in all phenomena. They will be impervious to all the gods belonging to the entourage of Māra and to those who hold the view that apprehends the person. Through a single letter, they will understand all letters, and through all letters, they will understand#56 one letter.#57 They will become skilled in teaching the Dharma to all beings with unimpeded confident eloquence. [192.b] They will gain acceptance of the profound Dharma. They will understand all conduct to be of a single defining characteristic. They will achieve an unobscured state through the four correct discriminations. I beseech the Blessed Ones to teach the names of these absorptions.”
$125To this the Blessed One responded, “Mañjuśrī, to that end, listen carefully and keep in mind what I shall say.”
Prince Mañjuśrī answered, “Blessed One, so be it.” He then listened#58 as the Blessed One had directed.
$126The Blessed One then said, “Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called the infinite immaculate. If bodhisattvas obtain this absorption, they will reveal all forms#59 to be pure. 
$127“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called swift travel. If bodhisattvas obtain this absorption, they will outshine the light of the sun and the moon. 
$128“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called source of light. If bodhisattvas obtain this absorption, they will overwhelm Śakra and Brahmā in their splendor. 
$129“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called showing the land. If bodhisattvas obtain this absorption, they will pacify the desire, anger, and ignorance of all their assembled retinues.
$130“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called unobstructed light. If bodhisattvas obtain this absorption, they will illuminate all buddha realms.
$131“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called forgetting no Dharma. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will retain all the Dharma teachings taught by the Buddha and teach them to others as well.
$132“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called imitating the pleasant sound of the lion’s roar. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will [193.a] make themselves heard all the way up to the Brahmā realm.
$133“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called truly creating all forms of joy, contentment, and satisfaction. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will gladden the various minds and thoughts of all sentient beings. 
$134“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called captivating to behold and greatly joyous. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will become captivating to behold and to listen to. 
$135“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called source of inconceivable qualities, wellspring of the precious domain of wisdom, singular stream free of affliction. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will be able to display all miracles and subdue all beings.
$136“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called the symbol of all languages. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will understand all languages, expressions, and signs. They will reveal a single letter through all letters, and all letters through a single letter.
$137“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called accumulation and demonstration of all merit and roots of virtue arisen from ripened action. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will remain in equipoise without saying anything. Without uttering a single sound, they will cause all beings to hear the words Buddha, Dharma, Saṅgha, hearers, solitary buddhas, bodhisattvas, and perfections.
$138“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called the exalted king of all dhāraṇīs. If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will know how to engage in the accomplishment of infinite dhāraṇīs. 
$139“Mañjuśrī, there is the absorption called the array of confident eloquence in all Dharma teachings. [193.b] If they obtain this absorption, bodhisattvas will become confidently eloquent in all utterances, languages, sounds, and expressions.”
$140Then Prince Mañjuśrī said to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, I have an insight to share regarding the unique description of qualities expressed in this Dharma teaching.”
The Blessed One responded, “Mañjuśrī, please share your insight.”
$141Mañjuśrī then said, “Blessed One, I wish that those bodhisattvas who are free of doubt and hesitation and who teach, hold, recite, integrate, and authentically and extensively expound this Dharma teaching to others, undoubtedly achieve confident eloquence in this very lifetime. I wish that they obtain swift confidence, vast confidence, confidence in the profound, unforgetting confidence, and variegated confidence. I wish that their minds become free from all animosity toward any sentient being. Why do I make that wish? It is because the accomplishment of this Dharma teaching depends on precisely this conduct.”
$142The Blessed One then approved of Prince Mañjuśrī, saying “Mañjuśrī, excellent, excellent. Your words are well spoken. Mañjuśrī, for instance, it is incontrovertible that generosity yields great wealth. It is incontrovertible that discipline leads to rebirth in the upper realms. It is incontrovertible that study leads to great insight. It is incontrovertible that familiarization leads to separation. Likewise, Mañjuśrī, it is incontrovertible that this Dharma teaching will bring forth confident eloquence in this very lifetime.
$143“Mañjuśrī, the rising sun dispels all the thick black of darkness. Mañjuśrī, likewise, you should wish for confident eloquence to arise as soon as this Dharma teaching is delivered. [194.a]
$144“Mañjuśrī, for instance, bodhisattvas who abide on the seat of awakening are certain to fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. Likewise, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattva great beings who recite this Dharma teaching are certain to achieve confident eloquence in this very lifetime.
$145“Mañjuśrī, therefore, bodhisattva great beings who wish to achieve confident eloquence in this very lifetime should without doubt or hesitation obtain this Dharma teaching, hold it, recite it, read it, understand it, and expound it extensively and correctly to others.”
$146Then the bodhisattva great being Amalagarbha said to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, after you pass into parinirvāṇa, I too will work to ensure that those bodhisattvas who have no doubt or hesitation and who retain, hold, read, understand, and correctly and extensively expound this Dharma teaching to others achieve confident eloquence in it.”
$147At this point, the evil Māra came weeping and wailing before the Blessed One and said, “Blessed One, if the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha is compassionate and bestows#60 happiness to suffering beings, then I beseech the Blessed One not to further bless this Dharma teaching, so as to dispel my own mental anguish. Blessed One, when the Blessed One was seated on the seat of awakening, and now as he delivered this Dharma teaching, [194.b] I was tormented by intense suffering, anguish, and sorrow. Blessed One, if any sentient being who so much as hears this Dharma teaching will proceed irreversibly to unsurpassed and perfect awakening, then no need to mention that those who not only hear but retain, hold, read, understand, and expound this Dharma teaching extensively and correctly to others will likewise proceed irreversibly to unsurpassed and perfect awakening. All these beings will fully pass into nirvāṇa. Therefore, Blessed One, my māra realm will become empty. If the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha is compassionate and bestows happiness onto those who suffer, then I beseech the Blessed One to relieve my suffering. I beseech the Blissful One to relieve my suffering.”
$148Then the Blessed One responded to the evil Māra, “Evil one, do not fear. Not all sentient beings will fully pass into nirvāṇa. Evil one, nor will I bless this Dharma teaching, so do not fear.”
When the Blessed One had consoled him, the evil Māra was satisfied, pleased, and happy. He became joyful, delighted, and elated, and instantly disappeared. 
$149Then Prince Mañjuśrī spoke to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, with what intention did you tell the evil Māra that you would not bless this Dharma teaching?”
The Blessed One responded, “Mañjuśrī, since no phenomenon is blessed, all phenomena [195.a] are blessed. Since this Dharma teaching is not blessed either, it is blessed. Mañjuśrī, that is why I told the evil Māra that I would not bless this Dharma teaching. Mañjuśrī, by the power of truth and the truth of these words, since no phenomenon is blessed, they are all blessed. They are beyond distinction, inexpressible, without characteristics, inexplicable, unutterable, nondual, without duality, and identical with the limit of reality. They are steeped in suchness and are of the nature of the realm of phenomena. By the power of this truth and these true words, may this Dharma teaching spread throughout the world!”
$150Then, having performed this truth blessing, the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, this Dharma teaching and all the eighty-four thousand sections of Dharma are the same,#61 so you must therefore retain this teaching of The Universal Gateway. You must hold it, read it, master it, and teach it extensively and authentically to others. Why is that? Ānanda, it is because the thus-gone ones teach the eighty-four thousand sections of the Dharma to beings once they have understood this realm of Dharma#62 of The Universal Gateway. Ānanda, for that reason you must guard, retain, and master this Dharma teaching.”
$151When the Blessed One had said this, the bodhisattva great being Amalagarbha, Prince Mañjuśrī, Venerable Ānanda, and the whole world with its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the Blessed One’s words. 
$152This completes The Universal Gateway, the tenth chapter within the one-hundred-thousand-chapter Dharma discourse of The Noble Great Heap of Jewels.
Colophon
$153It was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi along with the chief editor-translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.
