
The Noble 
Dhāraṇī of the Buddha’s Essence
The Translation
$1 [46.b][74.b]#7 Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
$2 Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was seated upon a lion throne in a seashore grove surrounded on all sides by the forest that was the Buddha’s domain. [47.a] There, he taught the Dharma to a retinue of gods that had gathered around and paid their respects to him. 
$3 The Blessed One addressed [75.a] the gods of the Śuddhāvāsa realm such as Maheśvara, Suvrata,#8 and the rest, saying, “Gods, listen well, pay attention, and I will teach. The Thus-Gone One, in order in future times to gather a fourfold retinue, look after them, care for them in all manner of ways, and cause them to advance, to bring those who possess all the teachings and their meanings to perfection, and to bring all who are properly established in the Great Vehicle to specific attainment in all its aspects, teaches and explains the dhāraṇī discourse called The Buddha’s Essence. You should retain it and, both now and in future times after I have passed into parinirvāṇa, teach and explain it to all members of the fourfold retinue who are properly established in the Great Vehicle. Never forsake it, and always teach it and promote it. As long as there are beings who are destitute and affected by the obscurations, you should preserve the teaching of the Thus-Gone One for them, teach it, and promote it.” 
$4 The gods replied, “Blessed One, we will do just that. We will sincerely and perfectly carry out the Thus-Gone One’s command.” 
$5 The Blessed One addressed them, saying, “Gods, this is the Dharma discourse called The Buddha’s Essence:
tadyathā amale nirmale sarvākārārtha­pariprāpte asamanta­sarva­kunākāre tryadhvāsaṅgānāvṛte samanta­daśadiśa­paripūrṇa­jñāne sarvāsaṅga­darśana­prāpte sarva­dharmam aviśata­paripūrṇe sarvākāra­saṅga­samanvite samantāpra [47.b] tihatateje tryadhva­daśasu dikṣu­pariprāptārthe śānta-prāśanta-upaśānta-samaśānta-vimokṣānuprāpte supratibuddha­dharma­dhātu atyantasunisrite sarvākāra­niḥsaraṇa [75.b] anavaśeṣaparaṅgate vipra­mukta asaṁyoga viprayoga-sthite dharmate gagana­sama-prakṛti­pariśuddha-nirmale asamanta-tryadhvānugata-suprāpte pūrvānta-aparanta madhyatrya­dhvasamantānuprapte anavaśeṣa parijñā­prahana-bhavana-sakṣātkriya­paramaparaṅgate yathāvati tathākāri sarvākāra­saṁpanne sarvākāra­mahā maitri­mahā­karuṇā sarvākāra­samasagrahānuprāpte 
$6 “Gods, this is the dhāraṇī discourse called The Buddha’s Essence. If noble sons or daughters from the fourfold community who are properly established in the Great Vehicle wear it on their bodies, recite it well, and uphold it, they will never give rise to inferior mental states. The Thus-Gone One will likewise remain with them, seated above the crowns of their heads. Some will certainly see the Buddha, some will hear him teach, some will become Dharma teachers, and some will gain the dhāraṇī power of not forgetting. Students who are on the path will never have that path interrupted, and they will have a continual stream of Dharma teachers. They will understand everything, never forget it, and be only one birth away from awakening. With those qualities, they will gain the power of retaining the entire ocean of knowledge.#9 They will receive all the attainments, beginning with acceptance of the fact that phenomena do not arise up to becoming fully liberated, perfect buddhas who are free from obscurations. You gods will understand the meaning of my teachings in this lifetime. You should teach it and promote it among the sons and daughters of the lineage. [48.a] Do not cast it aside, do not forsake it, and do not forget it!” 
$7 The gods responded, “Blessed One, we shall do just as you have said. We will teach and explain the Blessed One’s dhāraṇī discourse called The Buddha’s Essence[76.a] to the fourfold assembly, without hesitation, in its entirety. We will teach it and promote it among noble sons and daughters. It will be just as the Thus-Gone One has said. We will fully comprehend the Thus-Gone One’s holy Dharma, and for the noble sons and daughters will be of great meaning and something of great benefit.” 
$8 The Blessed One replied, “That is why you gods must do as I have said. This is the teaching that I give to you.” 
$9 After the Blessed One had spoken, the gods of the Śuddhāvāsa realm such as Maheśvara and Suvrata, along with the entire assembly, praised the Blessed One’s words. 
$10 This concludes “The Dhāraṇī of the Buddha’s Essence.”
Colophon
$11 This work was translated and edited by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla along with the great editor and translator Bandé Yeshé Dé. It was then corrected according to the new translation guidelines and then finalized.
