The names
$1 When the Blessed One had said this, the bodhisattva Prāmodyarāja asked, “Revered Blessed One, within this gathering of attending bodhisattva great beings, are there any who have attained these absorptions, these applications of the perfections, these eighty-four thousand gateways of absorption?”
$2  The Blessed One answered the bodhisattva Prāmodyarāja in the following way: [96.a] “Prāmodyarāja, except for the four thus-gone ones who in this Good Eon have already awakened to perfect buddhahood, all the rest of those who will awaken to perfect buddhahood in this Good Eon are present within this retinue of bodhisattva great beings, and they have attained those absorptions, those applications of the perfections, and those eighty-four thousand gateways of absorption.”
$3  The bodhisattva Prāmodyarāja now replied to the Blessed One, “Wonderful, wonderful! Revered Blessed One! I request that you please state the families and names of those bodhisattvas. In that way numerous people may be healed and be happy. By showing your love for the world in this way, gods and humans will be successful, healed, and happy, and the sacred Dharma will be protected and remain for a long time. In the future, the bodhisattvas will gain understanding and practice without complacency for the sake of unexcelled and perfect awakening.”
$4 The Blessed One then said to the bodhisattva Prāmodyarāja, “Prāmodyarāja, listen very closely and keep my words correctly in mind; I shall explain it to you.”
$5  “Blessed One, I shall do so,” answered the bodhisattva Prāmodyarāja, and he listened accordingly.
$6  The Blessed One now pronounced in verse the names#115 of the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas, as well as the names of the bodhisattvas: [96.b]
$7 “Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni,
Kāśyapa, Supreme of the Śākyas,
Maitreya, Siṃha, Pradyota,
Muni, and Kusuma.
$8 “Kusuma, Sunetra, Sārthavāha,
Mahābāhu, Mahābala,
Nakṣatrarāja, Oṣadhi,
Yaśaketu, and Mahāprabha.
$9 “The buddha Muktiskandha completes this section.
Vairocana, Sūryagarbha,
Candra, Arciṣmat, Suprabha,
Aśoka, Tiṣya.
$10 “Pradyota, Mālādhārin, Guṇaprabha,
Arthadarśin, Pradīpa,
Prabhūta, Vaidya, Sūrata,
Ūrṇa, Dṛḍha, Śrīdeva,
$11 “Duṣpradharṣa, Guṇadhvaja,
Rāhu, Gaṇin, Brahmaghoṣa,
Dṛḍhasaṃdhi, Anunnata,
Prabhaṃkara, Mahāmeru,
$12 “Vajra, Sañjayin, Nirbhaya,
Ratna, Padmākṣa, Balasena,
Kusumaraśmi, Jñānapriya,
Mahātejas, Brahmā, Amitābha,
$13 “Nāgadatta, Dṛḍhakrama,
Amoghadarśin, Vīryadatta,
Bhadrapāla, Nanda, Acyuta,
Siṃhadhvaja, Jaya, Dhārmika,
$14 “Prāmodyarāja, Sārathi,
Priyaṅgama, Varuṇa, Guṇabāhu,
Gandhahastin, Vilocana,
Meghasvara, Sucintita,
$15 “Sumanas, Vimala, Śaśin,
Mahāyaśas, Maṇicūḍa,
Ugra, Siṃhagati, Druma,
Vijitāvin, Prajñākūṭa,
$16 “Susthita, Mati, Aṅgaja,
Amitabuddhi, Surūpa,
Jñānin, Raśmi, Dṛḍhavrata,
Maṅgala, Satyaketu,
$17 “Padma, Nārāyaṇa,
Subāhu, Jñānākara,
Guṇārci,#116 Brahmadatta, [97.a]
Ratnākara, Kusumadeva,
$18 “Sucintitārtha, Dharmeśvara, Yaśomati,
Pratibhānakūṭa, Vajradhvaja,
The tenth possessor of the ten powers, Hitaiṣin,
Vikrīḍitāvin, Vigatatamas, Rāhudeva,
$19 “Merudhvaja, Gaṇiprabha, Ratnagarbha,
Atyuccagāmin, Tiṣya,
Viṣāṇin, the tenth protector of the three realms, Guṇakīrti,
Candrārka, Sūryaprabha, Jyotiṣka, Siṃhaketu,
$20 “Velāmarāja, Śrīgarbha, Bhavāntadarśin,
Vidyutprabha, Kanakaparvata,#117 Siṃhadatta,
The tenth victorious lord of men, Aparājita­dhvaja,
Pramodyakīrti, Dṛḍhavīrya, Saṃpannakīrti,
$21 “Vigatabhaya, Arhaddeva, Mahāpradīpa,
Lokaprabha, Surabhigandha, Guṇāgradhārin,
The tenth self-existing incomparable one, Vigatatamas,
Siṃhahanu, Ratnakīrti, Praśāntadoṣa,
$22 “Amṛtadhārin, Manujacandra, Sudarśana,
Pratimaṇḍita, Maṇiprabha, Girikūṭaketu,#118
The tenth, Dharmākara, Arthaviniścita,
Harṣadatta, Ratnākara, Janendrakalpa,
$23 “Vikrāntagāmin, Sthitabuddhi, Vibhrājacchattra,
Jyeṣṭha, Abhyudgataśrī, Siṃhaghoṣa,
The tenth leader of beings, Vikrīḍitāvin,
Nāgaprabhāsa, Kusumaparvata, Nāganandin,
$24 “Gandheśvara, Atiyaśas, Baladeva,
Guṇamālin, Nāgabhuja, Pratimaṇḍita­locana,
The tenth great sage, Sucīṛnabuddhi,
Jñānābhibhū, Amitalocana, Satyabhāṇin,
$25 “Sūryaprabha, Niyatabuddhi, Anantarūpa, [97.b]
Vairocana, Ratnaketu, Vigatakāṅkṣa,
The tenth self-arising one, Lokottīrṇa,
Amoghavikramin, Vibodhana, Puṣpaketu,
$26 “Śailendrarāja, Mahātejas, Kṛtārthadarśin,
Amitayaśas, Ratnadeva, Sthitārtha­jñānin,
The tenth one of matchless renown, Pūrṇamati,
Aśoka, Vigatamala, Brahmadeva,
$27 “Dharaṇīśvara, Kusumanetra, Vibhaktagātra,
Dharmaprabhāsa, Nikhiladarśin, Guṇaprabhāsa,
The tenth one worshiped by the three worlds, stainless Śaśivaktra,
Ratnaprabha, Ratnaketu,
$28 “Yaśottara, Prabhākara, Amitatejas,
Velāma, Siṃhagātra, Vidumati,
Durjaya, Guṇaskandha,
Śaśiketu, Sthāmaprāpta,
$29 “Anantavikrāmin, Candra, Vimala,
Sarvārtha­darśin, Śūra,
Samṛddha, Puṇya, Pradīpa,
Guṇārci, Vipulabuddhi,
$30 “Sujāta, Vasudeva, Vimatijaha,
Amitadhara, Vararuci, Anihata,
Asthita, the buddha Tacchaya,
Gaṇimukha, Jagadraśmi,
$31 “Prabhūta, Puṣya, Anantatejas,
Arthamati, Vaidyarāja,
Prahāṇakhila, Nirjvara, Sudatta,
Yaśadatta, Kusumadatta, Puruṣadatta,
$32 “Vajrasena, Mahādatta,
Śāntimati, Gandhahastin,
Nārāyaṇa, Sūrata, Anihata,
Candrārka, Vidyutketu, Mahita,
$33 “Śrīgupta, Jñānasūrya,
Siddhārtha, Merukūṭa, Aridama,
Padma, Arthakīrti,
Jñānakrama, Apagatakleśa,
$34 “Nala, Sugandha, Anupamarāṣṭra,
Marudyaśas, Bhavāntadarśin, Candra, [98.a]
Rāhu, Ratnacandra,
Siṃhadhvaja, Dhyānarata,
$35 “Anupama, Vikrīḍita, Guṇaratna,
Arhadyaśas, Padmapārśva, Ūrṇāvat,
Pratibhāna­kīrti, Maṇivajra,
Amitāyus, Maṇivyūha,
$36 “Mahendra, Guṇākara, Meruyaśas,
Daśaraśmi, Anindita, Nāgakrama,
Manoratha, Ratnacandra,
Śānta, Pradyotarāja, Sārathi,
$37 “Nandeśvara, Ratnacūḍa,
Vigatabhaya, Ratnagarbha, Ratnacandra,
Vimalakīrti, Śāntatejas,
Priyaketu,#119Rāhudeva, Suvayas,
$38 “Amarapriya, Ratnaskandha,
Laḍitavikrama, Siṃhapakṣa,
Atyuccagāmin, Janendra, Sumati,
Lokaprabha, Ratnatejas,
$39 “Bhāgīrathi, Saṃjaya, Rativyūha,
Tīrthakara, Gandhahastin, Arciṣmati,
Merudhvaja, Sugandha,
Dṛḍhadharma, Ugratejas,
$40 “Maṇidharman, Bhadradatta, the thus-gone Candra,
Brahmasvara, Siṃhacandra, Śrī,
Sujāta, Ajitagaṇa,
Yaśomitra, Satya,
$41 “Mahātapas, Meruraśmi,
Guṇakūṭa, Arhadyaśas, Dharmakīrti,
Dānaprabha, Vidyuddatta, Satyakathin,
Jīvaka, Suvayas, Sadgaṇin,
$42 “Viniścitamati, Bhavānta­maṇi­gandha,
Jayanandin, Siṃharaśmi,
Vairocana, Yaśottara, Sumedhas,
Maṇicandra, Ugraprabha,
$43 “Anihatavrata, Jagatpūjita, Maṇigaṇa,
Lokottara, Siṃhahastin,
Candra, Ratnārci, Rāhuguhya,
Guṇasāgara, Sahitaraśmi, [98.b]
$44 “Praśāntagati, Lokasundara,
Aśoka, Daśavaśa, Balanandin,
Sthāmaśrī, Sthāmaprāpta, Mahāsthāman,
Guṇagarbha, Satyacara,
$45 “Kṣemottamarāja, Tiṣya, Mahāraśmi,
Vidyutprabha, Guṇavisṛta,
Ratna, Śrīprabha, Māradama,#120
Kṛtavarman, Siṃhahasta, Supuṣpa,
$46 “Ratnottama, Sāgara,
Dharaṇīdhara, Arthabuddhi, Guṇagaṇa,
Guṇagaṇa, Ratnāgni,
Lokāntara, Lokacandra,
$47 “Madhura­svara­rāja, Brahmaketu, Gaṇimukha,
Siṃhagati, Ugradatta,
Dharmeśvara, Tejasprabha, Mahāraśmi,
Ratnayaśas, Gaṇiprabhāsa,
$48 “Anantayaśas, Amogharaśmi,
Ṛṣideva, Janendra, Dṛḍhasaṅgha,
Supakṣa, Ketu, Kusumarāṣṭra,
Dharmamati, Anilavegagāmin,
$49 “Sucittayaśas, Dyutimat, Marutskandha,
Guṇagupta, Arthamati, Abhaya,
Sthitamitra, Prabhāsthita­kalpa,
Maṇicaraṇa, Mokṣatejas, Sundarapārśva,
$50 “Subuddhi, Samantadarśin,
Jñānavara, Brahmavāsa,
Satyaruta, Subuddhi, Baladatta,
Siṃhagati, Puṣpaketu, Jñānākara,
$51 “Puṣpadatta, Guṇagarbha,
Yaśoratna, Adbhutayaśas,
Anihata, Abhaya, Sūryaprabha,
Brahmagāmin, Vikrāntadeva, Jñānapriya,
$52 “Satyadeva, Ratnagarbha, Guṇakīrti,
Jñānaśrī, Asita,
Dṛḍhavrata, Maruttejas,
Brahmamuni, Śanairgāmin, Vratatapas,
$53 “Arciskandha, Mahātejas,
Campaka, Toṣaṇa, Sugaṇin,
Indradhvaja, the tenth, Mahāpriya, [99.a]
Sumanā­puṣpa­prabha, Gaṇiprabha,
$54 “Creator,#121 Ojaṅgama, Suviniścitārtha,
Vṛṣabha, Subāhu, Mahāraśmi,
Āśādatta, Puṇyābha,
Ratnaruta, Vajrasena,
$55 “Samṛddha, Siṃhabala, stainless Netra,
Kāśyapa, Prasannabuddhi,
Jñānakrama, Ugratejas, Mahāraśmi,
Sūryaprabha, Vimalaprabha,
$56 “Vibhaktatejas, Anuddhata, Madhuvaktra,
Candraprabha, Vidyuddatta, Praśāntagāmin,
Akṣobhya, Arhatkīrti,
Guṇadharma, Laḍitakṣetra, Vyūharāja,
$57 “Abhyudgata, Hutārci,
Padmaśrī, Ratnavyūha, Subhadra,
Ratnottama, Sumedhas,
Samudradatta, Brahmaketu, Somacchattra, Arciṣmat,
$58 “Vimalarāja, Jñānakīrti, Saṃjaya, Guṇaprabha,
Vighuṣṭaśabda, Pūrṇacandra, Padmaraśmi, Suvrata,
Pradīparāja, Vidyutketu, Raśmirāja, Jyotiṣka,
Saṃpannakīrti, Padmagarbha, Puṣya, Cārulocana,
$59 “Anāvilārtha, Ugrasena, Puṇyatejas, Vikrama,
Asaṅgamati, Rāhudeva, Jñānarāśi, Sārathi,
Janendrakalpa, Puṣpaketu, Rāhula, Mahauṣadhi,
Nakṣatrarāja, Vaidyarāja, Puṇyahastin, Chedana,
$60 “Vighuṣṭarāja, Sūryaraśmi, Dharmakośa, Sumati,
Guṇendrakalpa, Vajrasena, Prajñākūṭa,
Susthita, Cīrṇabuddhi, Brahmaghoṣa, Guṇottama, Garjitasvara,
Abhijñāketu, Ketuprabha, Kṣema, Brahmā, Puṃgava,
$61 “Laḍitanetra, Nāgadatta, Satyaketu, Maṇḍita,
Adīnaghoṣa, Ratnaprabha, Ghoṣadatta, Siṃha,
Citraraśmi, Jñānaśūra, Padmagarbha, Puṣpita, [99.b]
Vikrāntagamin, Puṇyarāśi, Śreṣṭharūpa, Jyotiṣka,
$62 “Candrapradīpa, Tejorāśi, Bodhirāja, Akṣaya,
Subuddhinetra, Pūritāṅga, Prajñārāṣṭra, Uttama,
Toṣitatejas, Prajñādatta, Nātha, Mañjughoṣa,
Asaṅgakośa, Jyeṣṭhadatta, Śreṣṭha, Jñānavikrama,
$63 “Arciṣmat, Indra, Vegadhārin, Tiṣya, Suprabha, Yaśodatta,
Surūpa, Rājan, Arthasiddhi, Siṃhasena, Vāsava,
Yaśas, Jaya, Udāragarbha, Puṇyaraśmi, Śrotriya,
Pradīparāja, Jñānakūṭa, Uttamadeva, Pārthiva,
$64 “Vimuktilābhin, Suvarṇacūḍa, Rāhubhadra, Durjaya,
Muniprasanna, Somaraśmi, Kāñcanaprabha, Sudatta, Guṇendradeva,
Dharmacchattra, Puṇyabāhu, Asaṅga,
Prāṇītajñāna, Sūkṣmabuddhi, Sarvatejas, Oṣadhi,
$65 “Vimuktaketu, Prabhākośa, Jñānarāja, Bhīṣaṇa,
Oghajaha, Asaṅgakīrti, Satyarāśi, Susvara,
Girīndrakalpa, Dharmakūṭa, Mokṣatejas, Śobhita,
Praśāntagātra, Manojñavākya, Cīrṇabuddhi, Varuṇa,
$66 “Jagatpūjita,#122 Siṃhapārśva, Dharmavikrāmin, Subhaga,
Akṣobhyavarṇa, Tejorāja, Bodhana, Sulocana,
Sthitārtha­buddhi, Ābhāsaraśmi, Gandhatejas, Saṃtoṣaṇa,
Amoghagāmin, Bhasmakrodha, Vararūpa, Sukrama,
$67 “Pradānakīrti, Śuddhaprabha, Devasūrya, Prajñādatta,
Samāhitātman, Ojastejas, Kṣatriya, Bhāgīrathi,
Suvarṇottama, Vimuktacūḍa, Dhārmika, Sthitagandha,
Madaprahīṇa, Jñānakośa, Brahmagāmin, Candana,
$68 “Aśoka, Siṃharaśmi, Keturāṣṭra, Padmagarbha, [100.a]
Anantatejas, Devaraśmi, Prajñāpuṣpa, Vidvat,
Samṛddhajñāna, Brahmavasu, Ratnapāṇi, Indrama,
Anupamavādin, Jyeṣṭhavādin, Pūjya, Tiṣya, Sūrya,
$69 “Uttīrṇapaṅka, Jñānaprāpta, Siddhi, Mayūra, Dharmadatta,
Hitaiṣin, Jñānin, Yaśas, Raśmijāla, Vijita,#123
Vaiḍūryagarbha, Puṣpa, Devarāja, Śaśin, Smṛtiprabha,
Kuśalaprabha, Sarva­vara­guṇa­prabha,
$70 “Ratnaśrī, Manuṣyacandra,
Rāhu, Amṛtaprabha, Lokajyeṣṭha,
Jyotiṣprabha, Śāntagati, the tenth, Jñānasāgara,
Parvatendra, Praśānta, Guṇabala, Deveśvara,
$71 “Mañjughoṣa, Supārśva, Sthitārtha,
Guṇatejas, Anuttarajñānin,
The tenth victorious one, Amitasvara,
Sukhābha, Sumedhas, Vigata­mohārtha­cintin,
$72 “Viśiṣṭa­svarāṅga, Laḍitāgragāmin,
Śāntārtha, Adoṣa, Śubha­cīrṇa­buddhi,
Padmakośa, the tenth, Suraśmi,
Pratibhāna­varṇa, Sutīrtha, Gaṇendra,
$73 “Vigatabhaya, Jñānaruci,
The well-gone Pratibhāna­cakṣus,#124 Varabuddhi,
Candra, Ratnābhacandra, and the tenth, Abhaya,
Mahādarśana, Brahmaruta, Sughoṣa,
$74 “Mahā­prajñā­tīrtha, Asamabuddhi,
Acalaprajñābha, Buddhimati, Drumendra,
Ghoṣasvara, the tenth, Puṇyabala,
Sthāmaśrī, Āryapriya, Pratapta,
$75 “Jyotīrāma, Dundubhi­megha­svara,
Priya­cakṣurvaktra, Sujñāna, Samṛddha,
Guṇarāśi, the tenth, Prasanna,
Dharmadhvaja, Jñānaruta, Gagana,
$76 “Yajñasvara, Jñāna­vihāsa­svara, [100.b]
Guṇatejoraśmi, Ṛṣīndra,
Matimat, Pratibhānagaṇa, the tenth, Suyajña,
Candrānana, Sudarśana, Viraja,
$77 “Guṇasañcaya, Ketumat, Puṇyadhvaja,#125
Pratibhāna­rāṣṭra, Ratnapradatta,
Priyacandra, the tenth, Siṃhabala,
Vaśavartirāja, Amṛtaprasanna,
$78 “Samadhyāyin, Akṣobhya, Praśāntamala,
Deśāmūḍha, Laḍita, Suvaktra,
Sthita­vega­jñāna, the tenth, Kathendra,
Mahātejas, Gambhīramati, Amṛta,
$79 “Dharmabala, Pūjya, Puṣpaprabha,
Trailokyapūjya, Rāhu­sūrya­garbha,
Marutpūjita, the tenth, Mokṣadhvaja,
Kalyāṇacūḍa,#126 Amṛtaprabha, Vajra,
$80 “Dṛḍha, Ratnaskandha, Laḍitakrama,
Bhānumat, Śuddhaprabha,
Guṇacūḍa, the tenth, Anupamaśrī,
Siṃhagati, Udgata, Puṣpadatta,
$81 “Muktaprabha, Padma, Jñānapriya,
Laḍitavyūha, Amohavihārin,
Avraṇa, the tenth, Ketudhvaja,
Sukhacittin, Vimoharāja, Vidhijña,
$82 “Śuddhasāgara, Ratnadhara, Anavanata,
Jagattoṣaṇa, Mayūraruta, Adīna,
The tenth, Bhava­tṛṣṇā­mala­prahīṇa,
Cāritratīrtha, Bahudevaghuṣṭa,
$83 “Ratnakrama, Padmahastin, Śrī,
Jitaśatru, Samṛddhayaśas, Surāṣṭra,
Kusumaprabha, the tenth, Siṃhasvara,
Candrodgata, Damajyeṣṭha, Acala,
$84 “Upakāragati, Puṇya­pradīpa­rāja,
Svaracodaka, Gautama, Ojobala,
Sthita­buddhi­rūpa, the tenth, Sucandra, [101.a]
Bodhyaṅgapuṣpa, Siddhi, Praśasta,
$85 “Balatejojñāna, Kuśalapradīpa,
Dṛḍhavikrama, Devaruta, Praśānta,
Sūryānana, the tenth, Mokṣavrata,
Śīlaprabha, Vratasthita, Arajas,
$86 “Sārodgata, Añjana, Vardhana,
Gandhābha, Velāmaprabha, Smṛtīndra,
Asaṅgadhvaja, the tenth, Varabodhigati,
Caraṇaprasanna, Ratnapriya, Dharmeśvara,
$87 “Viśvadeva, Mahāmitra,
Sumitra, Praśāntagāmin,
Amṛtādhipa, the tenth, Meruprabha,
Āryastuta, Jyotiṣmat, Dīptatejas,
$88 “Avabhāsadarśin, Sucīrṇavipāka,
Supriya, Vigataśoka, Ratnaprabhāsa,
Cāritraka, the tenth, Puṇyabala,
Guṇasāgara, Caitraka, Mānajaha,
$89 “Mārakṣayaṃkara, Vāsanottīrṇa­gati,
Abhedyabuddhi, Udadhi, Śodhita,
Gaṇimuktirāja, the tenth, Priyābha,
Bodhidhvaja, Jñānaratna,
$90 “Suśītala, Brahmarāja, Jñānarata,
Ṛddhiketu, Janendrakalpa, Dharaṇīśvara,
Sūryapriya, the tenth, Rāhucandra,
Puṣpaprabha, Vaidyādhipa, Ojodhārin,
$91 “Puṇyapriya, Ratibala, Sughoṣa,
Dharmeśvara, Brahmaruta, Suceṣṭa,
The tenth, the victorious Askhalita­buddhi,
Mahāpraṇāda, Yaśaḥkīrti, Ketumat,
$92 “Vighuṣṭatejas, Jagadīśvara,
Druma, Supraṇaṣṭamoha, Amita,
Sucandra, the tenth, Ananta­pratibhāna­ketu,
Vratanidhi, Pūjya, Uttīrṇaśoka,
$93 “Kṣemapriya, Jagadmati, Priyaṅgama,
Caraṇābhijñāta, Utpala, Puṣpa­dama­sthita, [101.b]
The tenth, Ananta­pratibhāna­raśmi,
Ṛṣiprasanna, Guṇavīrya, Sāra,
$94 “Marudadhipa, Uccaratna, Prasanna, Bhāgīratha,
Puṇyamati, Hutārci,
The tenth, Ananta­guṇa­tejorāśi,
Siṃhavikrāmin, Acala, Prasanna,
$95 “Cīrṇaprabha, Nāgaruta, Saṃgīti, Cakradhara,
Vasuśreṣṭha, Lokapriya, Dharmacandra,
The tenth, Ananta­rati­kīrti,#127
Meghadhvaja, Prajñāgati, Sugandha,
$96 “Gaganasvara, Deva, Devarāja,
Maṇiviśuddha, Sudhana, Pradīpa,
The tenth, Ratna­svara­ghoṣa,
Janendrarāja, Rāhugupta,
$97 “Kṣemaṃkara, Siṃhamati, Ratnayaśas,
Kṛtārtha, Kṛtāntadarśin, Bhavapuṣpa,
Ūrṇa, the tenth, Atula­pratibhāna­rāja,
Vibhakta­jñā­svara, Siṃhadaṃṣṭra,
$98 “Laḍitagāmin, Puṇyapradīpa,#128 Maṅgalin,
Aśokarāṣṭra, Maticintin, Matimat,
Dharma­pradīpākṣa, the tenth, Sudarśana,#129
Vegajaha, Atibala, Prajñāpuṣpa,
$99 “Dṛḍhasvara, Sukhita, Arthavādin,
Priyaprasanna, Harivaktra,
Cūḍa, the tenth,
And Roca, known as the Lion.#130
$100 “When the names of the buddhas
Of the Good Eon resound,
Those who listen become free from ignorance
Concerning the fruition to be known, nirvāṇa.
$101 “Wise ones, listen to these names of the victorious ones
With devotion and respect!
Those who have properly heard these names
Will not experience the suffering of the lower realms in the future.
$102 “Those who maintain discipline and adhere to the vows,
Who become inspired by what they hear and gain understanding,
Will reach the perfection of profound acceptance
And behold these protectors of the world. [102.a]
$103 “For those who, out of ignorance, have engaged
In unwholesome actions throughout millions of eons,
The ripening of their actions will be exhausted,
And they will be victorious by remembering these names of the victorious ones.
$104 “Thus, by means of this absorption,
Gain access to tens of thousands of discourses,
Absorptions, miraculous abilities, and factors of correct understanding;
Achieve knowledge of numerous languages; and accomplish wisdom.
$105 “Living by pure means and without deceit,
With knowledge of karmic ripening and free from envy,
Endeavor in the means of attraction and the retentions,
So that you may fully understand this absorption.”
The lives
$106 When the Blessed One had spoken these words, the bodhisattva Prāmodyarāja made the following request: “Blessed One, this is excellent. Blessed One, for the benefit of gods and humans, please explain about the birthplace, the family, the light, the father, the mother, the son, the attendant, the two foremost and excellent followers, the perfect community of monks, the lifespan, the duration of the sacred Dharma, and the manifestation of relics that pertain to each of these buddhas of the Good Eon, so that numerous beings may receive healing and be happy, and so that bodhisattvas of the future may persevere in hearing and remain inspired, become exceptionally accomplished in the sacred Dharma, and become sources of insight.”
$107 The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva Prāmodyarāja, “Noble son, then listen carefully and keep my words in mind. I shall explain. The birthplace of the thus-gone Krakucchanda is known as Excellent City of Royal Palaces. His family line is that of Kāśyapa. His light extended across one league. Worship Gift was his father. Brahmā Victory was his mother. Supreme was his son. [102.b]Perfect Wisdom was his attendant. Among his monks, Master Scholar was foremost in terms of insight. Reciter was foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation consisted of forty thousand monks, his second of seventy thousand monks, and his third contained sixty thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan was forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma remained for eighty thousand years. His relics remained in a single collection and were contained in a single stūpa.
$108  “The birthplace of the thus-gone Kanakamuni is known as Fifth City. His family was brahmin. His light extended across half a league. Fire Gift was his father. Highest was his mother. Victorious Army was his son. Auspicious One was his attendant. Highest was foremost in terms of insight. Victory was foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation consisted of seventy thousand monks, his second of sixty thousand monks, and his third of fifty thousand monks. The extent of his lifespan was thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma remained for a thousand years. His relics remained in a single collection. There was also only one stūpa.
$109  “The birthplace of the thus-gone Kāśyapa is known as Cetana. His family was brahmin. His light extended across a mile. Brahmā Gift was his father. Wealth Possessor was his mother. Leader was his son. Friend of All was his attendant. Bharadvāja was foremost in terms of insight. Star King was foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation consisted of twenty thousand monks, his second of eighty thousand monks, and his third of sixty thousand monks. The extent of his lifespan was twenty thousand years. His sacred Dharma remained for seven thousand years. His relics remained in a single collection. There was also only one stūpa.
$110  “Prāmodyarāja, I, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, was born in Kapilavastu. [103.a] My family is kṣatriya and my lineage that of Gautama. My light extends across one fathom. Śuddhodana is my father. Māyā is my mother. Rāhula is my son. Ānanda is my attendant. Upatiṣya is foremost in terms of insight. Kolita is foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. My first congregation consisted of one thousand two hundred and fifty monks. The extent of my lifespan is one hundred years. My sacred Dharma will remain for five hundred years; for five hundred years there will remain a contrived appearance of the sacred Dharma. There will be abundant relics.
$111 “Prāmodyarāja, the thus-gone Maitreya will be born in the royal palace of the city known as Crown Intelligence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend a league. Excellent Brahmā will be his father. Brahmā Lady will be his mother. Power of Merit will be his son. Ocean will be his attendant. Wisdom Light will be foremost in terms of insight. Firm Endeavor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of nine hundred and sixty million worthy hearers, his second of nine hundred and forty million worthy hearers, and his third of nine hundred and twenty million worthy hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$112 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Siṃha will be the city known as Flower God. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend a league. Lion Tiger will be his father. Cry of Bliss will be his mother. Great Power will be his son. Gentle will be his attendant. Wisdom Mount will be foremost in terms of insight. Cloud Bearer will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one billion members, his second of nine hundred billion members, [103.b] and his third of eight hundred million members. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$113 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Pradyota will be the city known as Star Bearer. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five leagues. Excellent Intelligence will be his father. Flower will be his mother. Time Knower will be his son. Leader of Heroes will be his attendant. Fortune will be foremost in terms of insight. Sound of Thunder will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one trillion hearers, his second of nine hundred ninety million hearers, and his third of nine hundred eighty million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-five thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$114 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Muni will be the city known as Highest Flower. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one league. Great Mountain will be his father. Jasmine Flower will be his mother. Supreme Jewel will be his son. Truly Supreme will be his attendant. Certain Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Power Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of ten thousand hearers, his second of four hundred million hearers, and his third of five hundred million worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$115 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Kusuma will be the city known as White Lotus. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight leagues. Supreme Time will be his father. Flower will be his mother. Leader of the People will be his son. Joy of Awakening will be his attendant. [104.a] Dharma Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of sixty billion hearers, his second of three hundred fifty million hearers, and his third of three hundred forty million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$116 “The birthplace of the second thus-gone one named Kusuma will be called Vast Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Flower Crown will be his father. Endowed with Dharma will be his mother. Pure Body will be his son. Keen Intelligence will be his attendant. Excellent Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Joyous will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one hundred forty million hearers, his second of one hundred fifty million hearers, and his third of one hundred sixty million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred million years. His relics will be abundant.
$117 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Sunetra will be called Well Doer. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twelve leagues. Jewel will be his father. Endowed with Śāla Trees will be his mother. Star King will be his son. Qualities of Intelligence will be his attendant. Infinite Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Lion Gait will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of three hundred thousand hearers, his second of two hundred and eight thousand hearers, and his third of three hundred sixty thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. [104.b] His sacred Dharma will remain for three hundred million years. His relics will be abundant. This thus-gone one alone will ripen more sentient beings than all the first ten combined.
$118 “The thus-gone Sārthavāha will be born in the royal palace of the city known as Supreme Beauty. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-four leagues. Undaunted will be his father. Wish to Benefit will be his mother. Joy will be his son. Ocean will be his attendant. Supreme Glory will be foremost in terms of insight. Worthy of Worship will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seven hundred thousand hearers, his second of six hundred thousand hearers, and his third of five hundred thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be ten billion years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-two thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$119 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mahābāhu will be called Movement. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five leagues. Diligence Gift will be his father. Given by the Sages will be his mother. Illuminator will be his son. Excellent Mind will be his attendant. Undaunted Roar will be foremost in terms of insight. Moving like the Wind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one hundred million hearers, and beyond that innumerably many. The extent of his lifespan will be four hundred million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$120 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mahābala will be the city called Jewel Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Gorgeous will be his father. Splendid will be his mother. Lion Gait will be his son. Excellent Joy will be his attendant. [105.a]Supreme Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Proper Adherence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of three hundred thousand hearers, his second of twice as many hearers, and his third of ten thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$121 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Nakṣatrarāja will be the city called Jambu River. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Light Gift will be his father. Excellent Intelligence will be his mother. Conqueror will be his son. Wisdom Power will be his attendant. Master of Discussion will be foremost in terms of insight. Blessing will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one billion hearers, his second of one billion nine hundred million hearers, and his third of one billion eight hundred million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$122 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Oṣadhi will be called Endowed with Śāla Trees. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one league. Excellent Youth will be his father. Beautiful Intelligence will be his mother. Mountain Banner will be his son. Flower will be his attendant. Source of Dharma will be foremost in terms of insight. Power of Merit will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seven hundred million hearers, his second of six hundred ninety million hearers, and his third of seven hundred eighty million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-seven thousand years. [105.b] His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$123 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Yaśaketu#131 will be called Radiant Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty leagues. Luminous will be his father. Endowed with Śāla Trees will be his mother. Highest Flower will be his son. Eye of Joy will be his attendant. Insight Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Lion Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of three hundred twenty thousand hearers, his second of three hundred ten thousand hearers, and his third of three hundred thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$124 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mahāprabha will be the city called Blissful Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend forty leagues. Bajira will be his father. Given by the Victor will be his mother. Moon Parasol will be his son. Serene Intelligence will be his attendant. Essence of the Sentient will be foremost in terms of insight. Gentle will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of nine hundred seventy million hearers, his second of nine hundred fifty million hearers, and his third of nine hundred thirty million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$125 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Muktiskandha will be the city called Moon Bearer. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one league. Excellent Mind will be his father. Giver of Lightning will be his mother. Joyous Movement will be his son. Jewel Light will be his attendant. Wisdom Hero will be foremost in terms of insight, [106.a] and Stable Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of eight hundred million thirty thousand hearers, his second of twice as many hearers, and his third of sixty thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for five hundred ten thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$126 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Vairocana will be the city called Excellent Dharma. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine leagues. Conqueror will be his father. Excellent Flower will be his mother. Same Image will be his son. Land of Excellence will be his attendant. Utter Excellence will be foremost in terms of insight. Joyous will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of six hundred twenty thousand hearers, his second of six hundred ten thousand hearers, and his third of six hundred thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be five hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty-eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$127 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Sūryagarbha will be the city called Endowed with Flowers. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend two hundred leagues. Wealth Possessor will be his father. Flower will be his mother. Star Knower will be his son. Highest Wisdom will be his attendant. Force of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Vajra Force will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one hundred thousand monks, his second of one billion hearers, his third of eight hundred quadrillion hearers, and his fourth of ninety million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be seven hundred million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three hundred million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$128 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Candra will be known as Supreme Jewel. [106.b] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight leagues. Campaka Eye will be his father. Medicine will be his mother. Punarvasu will be his son. Utterly Fearless will be his attendant. Highest Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Superior Dharma will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of twelve billion hearers, his second of fourteen billion hearers, his third of eighteen billion hearers, and his fourth of twenty billion hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eleven thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$129 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Arciṣmat will be the city called Excellent Dust. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty leagues. Heap of Merit will be his father. Dharma Intelligence will be his mother. Supreme Campaka will be his son. Great Acumen will be his attendant. Sound of Thunder will be foremost in terms of insight. Highest Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seven million hearers, his second of eight million hearers, and his third of nine million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$130 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Suprabha will be the city called Starlight. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirteen leagues. Sun Power will be his father. Moon Possessor will be his mother. Great Lord will be his son. Stable Power will be his attendant. Wisdom Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Body of Brightness will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of five billion hearers, [107.a] his second of four hundred million hearers, and his third of three hundred fifty million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$131 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Aśoka will be the city called Insight Gift. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighteen leagues. Flower Gift will be his father. Endowed with Dharma will be his mother. Light Gift will be his son. Melody of Joy will be his attendant. Great Mountain will be foremost in terms of insight. Given by the Victor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of twenty thousand hearers, his second of ten thousand hearers, and his third of nine hundred fifty thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three hundred fifty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$132 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Tiṣya will be the city called Supreme Campaka. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight leagues. Divine Excellence will be his father. Generosity Joy will be his mother. Flash of Light will be his son. Joyous Sight will be his attendant. Highest Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Superior to the World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of eight hundred million hearers, his second of seven hundred eighty million hearers, and his third of seven hundred million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$133 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Pradyota will be called Endowed with Islands. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend a thousand worlds. Superior Dharma will be his father. Lotus Possessor will be his mother. [107.b] Moon Foot will be his son. Melody of Fame will be his attendant. Glorious Merit will be foremost in terms of insight. Vajra Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one hundred sixty million hearers, his second of one hundred seventy million hearers, and his third of one hundred eighty million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be fourteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$134 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mālādhārin will be the city called Source of Merit. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. White Lotus will be his father. Gift of Qualities will be his mother. Glory of Merit will be his son. Excellent Form will be his attendant. Infinite Lamp will be foremost in terms of insight. King of the Gathering will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of nine hundred million worthy hearers, his second of nine hundred ninety million worthy hearers, and his third of eight hundred eighty million worthy hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$135 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Guṇaprabha will be the city called Utpala. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty leagues. Endowed with Light will be his father. Heap of Merit will be his mother. Dharma Acumen will be his son. Merit Worthy of Worship will be his attendant. Beryl Essence will be foremost in terms of insight. Granted by the Ground will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of sixteen billion hearers, his second of twelve billion hearers, and his third of eighteen billion hearers. [108.a] The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$136 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Arthadarśin will be the city called Supreme Essence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty-two leagues. Moon of the Land will be his father. Divine Joy will be his mother. Renowned Qualities will be his son. Brahmā Roar will be his attendant. Moon Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Given by the Victor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of six hundred twenty thousand worthy ones, his second of seven hundred thousand worthy ones, and his third of eight hundred thousand worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for a hundred million years. His relics will be abundant.
$137 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Pradīpa will be the city called Beautiful Jewel. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend fifty leagues. Jewel Edge will be his father. Star Color will be his mother. Jewel Essence will be his son. Clear Mind will be his attendant. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of insight. Endowed with Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seven hundred thousand hearers, his second of nine hundred thousand hearers, and his third of one million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for two hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$138 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Prabhūta will be the city called Splendid Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Excellent Gift will be his father. Endowed with Excellent Thought will be his mother. Friend of the Victorious Ones will be his son. Lion Strength will be his attendant. Gift of Freedom from Suffering will be foremost in terms of insight, [108.b] and Lofty Mountain will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of thirty million hearers, his second of two billion hearers, and his third of one billion hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$139 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Vaidya will be called Accomplishment of Yogic Discipline. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy-seven leagues. Intention will be his father. Supreme Jambu will be his mother. Hero Gift will be his son. Moon Joy will be his attendant. Ocean will be foremost in terms of insight. Elephant Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of two million three hundred thousand hearers, his second of two million five hundred thousand hearers, and his third of two million eight hundred thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for two million five hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$140 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Sūrata will be the city called Excellent Wealth. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten leagues. Supreme Treasure will be his father. Moonlight will be his mother. Lord of Dharma will be his son. Joy for the World will be his attendant. Sound of Thunder will be foremost in terms of insight. Flower Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of three hundred million hearers, his second of two hundred eighty million hearers, and his third of two hundred seventy million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$141 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Ūrṇa will be the city called Radiant Splendor. [109.a] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. King of the Gathering will be his father. Fortunate Joy will be his mother. Mountain Gift will be his son. Divine Moon will be his attendant. Wisdom Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Worshiped by Gods will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of six hundred twenty million hearers, his second of six hundred ten million hearers, and his third of six hundred million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$142 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Dṛḍha will be called Sound of Merit. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Śāla King will be his father. Joy of Good People will be his mother. Gift to the World will be his son. Splendid Power will be his attendant. Moon Crest will be foremost in terms of insight. Luminous Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one hundred thousand hearers, his second of nine million hearers, and his third of eight million hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be twelve thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$143 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Śrīdeva will be called Endowed with Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twelve leagues. Honey Vessel will be his father. Endowed with Dharma will be his mother. Crown of Joy will be his son. Firm Endeavor will be his attendant. Earth Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Powerful Moon will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. He will have one congregation, containing one billion hearers. [109.b] The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$144 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Duṣpradharṣa will be called Application Accomplished. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten million leagues. Divine Rāhu will be his father. Endowed with Merit will be his mother. Hidden Moon will be his son. Joyous Truth will be his attendant. True Jewel will be foremost in terms of insight. Sound of Thunder will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of three hundred thousand hearers, his second of five hundred thousand hearers, and his third of eight hundred thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred eighty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$145 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Guṇadhvaja will be called Moon Bearing. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five leagues. Friend of the Royal Star will be his father. Gift of the Wealth God will be his mother. Vajra Force will be his son. Jewel Joy will be his attendant. Sun Essence will be foremost in terms of insight. Leader will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of one hundred thirty thousand hearers, his second of one hundred fifty thousand hearers, and his third of one hundred sixty thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$146 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Rāhu will be called Jewel Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seventy-six leagues. Powerful Strength will be his father. Indomitable will be his mother. Moonlight will be his son. Beryl Essence will be his attendant. [110.a]God of Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Joyous Yearning will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for five hundred thousand years. This fortieth thus-gone one will liberate as many sentient beings as those liberated by the combined activities of all the previous thus-gone ones. I shall therefore not specify his congregations. The great earth will become of the nature of the seven precious substances. There will be trees of jewels and also trees that grow garments. Sentient beings will be born miraculously. There will be no lower realms whatsoever.
$147 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Gaṇin will be called Beautiful Movement. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend half a league. Highest Jewel will be his father. Jewel Light will be his mother. Earth Holder will be his son. Peaceful Mind will be his attendant. Crane Call will be foremost in terms of insight. Objectives Accomplished will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. He will have a single congregation, consisting of a hundred thousand hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$148 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Brahmaghoṣa will be called Splendid Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty leagues. Brahmā Master will be his father. Blissful will be his mother. Splendid Light will be his son. Lotus Eye will be his attendant. Golden Color will be foremost in terms of insight. Giver of Lightning will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of eight hundred sixty million worthy ones, [110.b] his second of nine hundred million worthy ones, and his third of one billion worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$149 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Dṛḍhasaṃdhi will be called Blooming Flowers. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty leagues. Joyous Merit will be his father. Happy will be his mother. Giver of Knowledge of Time will be his son. Meaningful Action will be his attendant. Supreme Moon will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Gold will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seven hundred billion worthy ones, his second of seven hundred eighty billion worthy ones, and his third of eight hundred billion worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$150 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Anunnata will be called Happy World. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten leagues. Ocean will be his father. Given by the Sages will be his mother. Eye of Beauty will be his son. Ruler of Men will be his attendant. Well-Considered Aims will be foremost in terms of insight. Endowed with True Words will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seventy-eight thousand worthy ones, his second of seventy-six thousand worthy ones, and his third of seventy-five thousand worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$151 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Prabhaṃkara will be called Golden Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm. [111.a]Radiant will be his father. Jewel Gift will be his mother. Precious Qualities will be his son. Moon Flower will be his attendant. Renown will be foremost in terms of insight. Royal Master of Retention will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of fifty trillion hearers, his second of forty trillion hearers, and his third of thirty trillion hearers. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seven billion years. His relics will be abundant.
$152 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mahāmeru will be called Jewel Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty leagues. Moon Splendor will be his father. Given by the Sun will be his mother. Moon Canopy will be his son. Supreme Jewel will be his attendant. Excellent Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Victorious Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seven hundred million worthy ones, his second of eight hundred million worthy ones, and his third of nine hundred million worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-two thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$153 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Vajra will be called Spread Out Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixteen leagues. Jewel Light will be his father. Utpala Eye will be his mother. Sustainer will be his son. Ocean will be his attendant. Gift of the Wrathful will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Companion will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of four billion worthy hearers, his second of three billion worthy hearers, and his third of two billion worthy hearers. [111.b] The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$154 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Sañjayin will be called Endowed with Sandalwood. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty leagues. Flower will be his father. Flashing Light will be his mother. Heap of Jewels will be his son. Jewel Mind will be his attendant. Fearless will be foremost in terms of insight. King of Mountains will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of seven hundred thousand worthy ones, his second of six hundred thousand worthy ones, and his third of five hundred thousand worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$155 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Nirbhaya will be called Enemy Defeater. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety leagues. Light Gift will be his father. Moon Possessor will be his mother. Moon Master will be his son. Moon will be his attendant. King of the Gathering will be foremost in terms of insight. Given by the Gods will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. His first congregation will consist of eight hundred thousand worthy ones, his second of seven hundred eighty thousand worthy ones, and his third of seven hundred sixty thousand worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$156 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Ratna will be called Stable Borders. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend a hundred thousand leagues. Given by the Sages will be his father. Merit Gift will be his mother. Medicinal Flower will be his son. Diligence Gift will be his attendant. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [112.a] In the first congregation there will be four hundred million hearers, in the second there will be three hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be one hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$157 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Padmākṣa will be called Flower Land. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-two leagues. Highest Flower will be his father. Beauty will be his mother. Divine Joy will be his son. Flower of Freedom from Suffering will be his attendant. Light of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Granted by Accumulations will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million worthy ones, in the second there will be three hundred fifty million, and in the third there will be four hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$158 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Balasena will be called Supreme Excellence. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six leagues. God of Strength will be his father. Gift of Bliss will be his mother. Radiance of Merit will be his son. Dharma Protector will be his attendant. Victorious King will be foremost in terms of insight. Perfectly Blissful will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be sixty thousand worthy ones, in the second there will be fifty-eight thousand, and in the third there will be fifty-seven thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be sixteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eight thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$159 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Kusumaraśmi will be called Moon of Excellent Flowers. [112.b] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy-eight leagues. Delightful Sight will be his father. Star Possessor will be his mother. Stable Dharma will be his son. Awakening will be his attendant. Ultimate Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon Banner will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be three hundred million worthy ones, in the second there will be three hundred twenty million, and in the third there will be three hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$160 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Jñānapriya will be called Supreme Wealth. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight leagues. Virtue will be his father. Excellent Splendor will be his mother. Hidden by the Gods will be his son. Benevolent will be his attendant. Moon Canopy will be foremost in terms of insight. Campaka will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be nine billion worthy ones, in the second there will be eight billion, and in the third there will be seven billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty-seven thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$161 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mahātejas will be called Abundant Offering. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five leagues. Jewel Treasury will be his father. Splendid will be his mother. Highest Radiance will be his son. Excellent Hand will be his attendant. Radiant Fire will be foremost in terms of insight. Lotus Essence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seventy thousand worthy ones, in the second there will be seventy-five thousand, and in the third there will be eighty thousand. [113.a] The extent of his lifespan will be five hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$162 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Brahmā will be called Gold Colored. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three leagues. Joy Free from Suffering will be his father. Endowed with Sandalwood will be his mother. Victorious Force will be his son. Enemy Tamer will be his attendant. Divine Lord will be foremost in terms of insight. Crown Vajra will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be a single congregation consisting of eighty million worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be twelve thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty-one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$163 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Amitābha will be called Delightful. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seventy-six leagues. Shining Master of Melodies will be his father. Moonlight will be his mother. Joyous will be his son. Joyous Force will be his attendant. Master of Purity will be foremost in terms of insight. Flashing Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be two billion worthy ones, in the second there will be four billion, and in the third there will be six billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$164 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Nāgadatta will be called Bright Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend half a league. Held by the Victorious One will be his father. Endowed with the Supreme will be his mother. Power of Merit will be his son. Jewel Lamp will be his attendant. Supreme Campaka will be foremost in terms of insight. [113.b] Divine Human will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be eighty thousand hearers, in the second there will be seventy-eight thousand, and in the third there will be seventy-five thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for a thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$165 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Dṛḍhakrama will be called Supreme Excellence. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Lion Fangs will be his father. Tree Trunk Gift will be his mother. Dharma Speaker will be his son. Excellent Emanation will be his attendant. Jewel Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one billion worthy hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred ninety million, and in the third there will be nine hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be one billion years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred and fifty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$166 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Amoghadarśin will be called Luminous. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one fathom. Virtue Gift will be his father. Honey Eye will be his mother. Star Color will be his son. Jambu River will be his attendant. Essence Friend will be foremost in terms of insight. Given by the Sages will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be nine hundred sixty million hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$167 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Vīryadatta will be called Campa. [114.a] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Excellent Wisdom will be his father. Splendid Gift will be his mother. God Free from Suffering will be his son. Worship Ornament will be his attendant. Supreme Nonapprehension will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be a single congregation consisting of eight hundred thousand worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$168 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Bhadrapāla will be called Gift of Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten leagues. Precious King of Stars will be his father. Endowed with Merit will be his mother. Tiger Gift will be his son. Supreme Mountain will be his attendant. Pervasive Lord of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Ocean of Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be but a single congregation consisting of one billion eight hundred million worthy ones who have achieved mastery. The extent of his lifespan will be two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$169 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Nanda will be called Endowed with Riches. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty leagues. Brahmā God will be his father. Victorious Glory will be his mother. Great Splendor will be his son. Powerful Movement of Bliss will be his attendant. Merit Hand will be foremost in terms of insight. Eye of Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred thirty million hearers, in the second there will be seven hundred twenty million, and in the third there will be seven hundred ten million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. [114.b] His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$170 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Acyuta will be called Miraculous Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seventy leagues. King of Doctors will be his father. Glorious Star will be his mother. Flower God will be his son. Indomitable Strength will be his attendant. Infinite Fame will be foremost in terms of insight. Powerful Hero will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be six hundred million hearers, in the second there will be five hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be five hundred seventy million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$171 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Siṃhadhvaja will be called Brightness Attained. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety leagues. Dharma Banner will be his father. Meritorious Friend will be his mother. Gift of Riches will be his son. Worship will be his attendant. Given by Application will be foremost in terms of insight. Beauty of Yogic Discipline will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be two hundred twenty million hearers, in the second there will be two hundred ten million, and in the third there will be two hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$172 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Jaya will be called Jewel Conduct. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten leagues. Sun Splendor will be his father. Flower Eye will be his mother. Truth Appreciator will be his son. Endowed with Dharma will be his attendant. [115.a]True Yogic Discipline will be foremost in terms of insight. Dharma Excellence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be three hundred sixty million hearers, in the second there will be three hundred seventy million, and in the third there will be three hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eight million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$173 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Dhārmika will be called Joyous Gods. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven leagues. Invincible will be his father. Endowed with Fame will be his mother. Divine Leader will be his son. Sun Gift will be his attendant. Great Chariot will be foremost in terms of insight. Medicine Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be eighty million hearers, in the second there will be seventy million, and in the third there will be eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$174 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Prāmodyarāja will be called Aims of Beings Accomplished. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight leagues. Highest will be his father. Glorious Aspiration will be his mother. Gold Gift will be his son. Excellent Friend will be his attendant. Supreme Jewel will be foremost in terms of insight. Divine Beauty will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be four hundred million hearers, in the second there will be three hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be three hundred seventy million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. [115.b] His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$175 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Sārathi will be called Jewel Treasury. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one league. Excellent Birth will be his father. Jewel will be his mother. Light of Merit will be his son. Ocean Treasury will be his attendant. Moon Conduct will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be nine hundred million hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$176 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Priyaṅgama will be called World of Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three leagues. Servant of Peace will be his father. Endowed with Joy will be his mother. Brahmā Gift will be his son. Dharma Leader will be his attendant. Supreme Virtue will be foremost in terms of insight. Gift of Immortality will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be five hundred million hearers, in the second there will be four hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be four hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$177 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Varuṇa will be called Excellent Mind. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty leagues. Honest Joy will be his father. Dharma Intelligence will be his mother. Superior Moon will be his son. Splendid Crest will be his attendant. Sound of Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. [116.a]Freedom from Suffering will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million hearers, in the second there will be sixty billion, and in the third there will be fifty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$178 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Guṇabāhu will be called Endowed with Incense. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine leagues. Fire Gift will be his father. Splendid Hill will be his mother. Star King will be his son. Utpala will be his attendant. Stainless Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Gift of Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one hundred forty million hearers, in the second there will be one hundred sixty million, and in the third there will be one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$179 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Gandhahastin will be called Meritorious Incense. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-two leagues. Glorious Incense will be his father. Flower Hill will be his mother. Light of Joy will be his son. Truth Crest will be his attendant. Joyous Moon will be foremost in terms of insight. Capable Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be six hundred sixty million hearers, in the second there will be six hundred forty million, and in the third there will be six hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant. [116.b]
$180 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Vilocana will be called Supreme Campaka. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend hundred leagues. Form Gift will be his father. Superior Jewel will be his mother. Man will be his son. Moon will be his attendant. Gift of Illumination will be foremost in terms of insight. Diverse Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million hearers, in the second there will be six hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be six hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be nine hundred million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nine hundred ninety million years. His relics will be abundant.
$181 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Meghasvara will be called Joyous Abode. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty-four leagues. Supreme Lightning will be his father. Splendid Hill will be his mother. Endowed with Dharma will be his son. Enemy Tamer will be his attendant. Moon Essence will be foremost in terms of insight. Powerful Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million hearers, in the second there will be seven hundred fifty million, and in the third there will be eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$182 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Sucintita will be called Limitless Jewels. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend half a league. Stable Mind will be his father. Endowed with Merit will be his mother. Flower Gift will be his son. Gift of Strength will be his attendant. Incomparable will be foremost in terms of insight. Given by the Sages will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one hundred thousand hearers, in the second there will be eighty thousand, [117.a] and in the third there will be seven million. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$183 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Sumanas will be called Beautiful to See. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend fourteen leagues. Wealth God will be his father. Splendid will be his mother. Flower will be his son. Supreme Truth will be his attendant. Evenness will be foremost in terms of insight. Moving with Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be two hundred eighty million hearers, in the second there will be two hundred fifty million, and in the third there will be two hundred thirty million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$184 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Vimala will be called Possessing Wealth and Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twenty-eight leagues. Glorious Essence will be his father. Flower Light will be his mother. Splendid Excellence will be his son. Incomparable will be his attendant. Earth Mountain will be foremost in terms of insight. Delightful will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be eighty thousand hearers, in the second there will be ninety thousand, and in the third there will be one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$185 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Śaśin will be called Free from Suffering. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Highest will be his father. Supreme Glory will be his mother. Gift of Splendor will be his son. Superior Dharma will be his attendant. Mountain will be foremost in terms of insight. [117.b] Joy of the Sages will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one billion hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred million, and in the third there will be eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for two million years. His relics will be abundant.
$186 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mahāyaśas will be called Joyous Focus. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twelve leagues. Heap of Glory will be his father. Given by the Sun will be his mother. Abandoning Doubt will be his son. Attentive to Meanings Heard will be his attendant. Land of Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Wellspring Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be five billion hearers, in the second there will be three billion, and in the third there will be two billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for five thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$187 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Maṇicūḍa will be called Luminosity. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty leagues. Joyous Understanding will be his father. Campaka Lady will be his mother. Victorious Army will be his son. Infinite Qualities will be his attendant. Jewel Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Austerities of Yogic Discipline will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be nine billion hearers, in the second there will be ten billion, and in the third there will be twelve billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$188 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Ugra will be called Happy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm. [118.a]Stūpa will be his father. Śāla Lady will be his mother. Luminous will be his son. Jewel of Joy will be his attendant. Fortunate Light will be foremost in terms of insight. Enemy Tamer will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one hundred thirty million worthy hearers, in the second there will be one hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be one hundred fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$189 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Siṃhagati will be called Studded. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-three leagues. Mountain of Joy will be his father. Medicine will be his mother. Harbor will be his son. Leisurely Movement will be his attendant. Awakening from Sleep will be foremost in terms of insight. Expansive Land will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one million seven hundred thousand hearers, in the second there will be one million six hundred thousand, and in the third there will be one million four hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy million years. His relics will be abundant.
$190 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Druma will be called Supreme Campaka. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten million leagues. King of Śālas will be his father. Crest of Intelligence will be his mother. Joyous Movement will be his son. Radiant Gift will be his attendant. Liberation Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Hard to Achieve will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be four hundred eighty million hearers, [118.b] in the second there will be three hundred fifty million, and in the third there will be three hundred thirty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$191 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Vijitāvin will be called Land of Medicine. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine leagues. Joyous God will be his father. Wealth Gift will be his mother. Gift of Heroes will be his son. Dharma Gift will be his attendant. Universal Victor will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Offering will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred sixty million hearers, in the second there will be seven hundred forty million, and in the third there will be seven hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$192 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Prajñākūṭa will be called Gift of Excellence. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eleven leagues. Giver of Everything will be his father. Splendid Honey will be his mother. Brahmā God will be his son. Dharma Fame will be his attendant. Mind of the Capable will be foremost in terms of insight. Leader will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be four hundred fifty million hearers, in the second there will be four hundred thirty million, and in the third there will be four hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa. [119.a]
$193 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Susthita will be called Chariot of Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten leagues. Indomitable Countenance will be his father. Call of Joy will be his mother. Concealer will be his son. Sage Mind will be his attendant. Guru Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Lamp of Wealth will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be forty-six thousand hearers, in the second there will be forty-five thousand, and in the third there will be forty-three thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$194 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Mati will be called Attractive Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Gift of Discipline will be his father. Qualities of Intelligence will be his mother. Sun Gift will be his son. Gift of the Capable will be his attendant. Conduct will be foremost in terms of insight. Precious Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be ninety million hearers, in the second there will be seventy million, and in the third there will be sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$195 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Aṅgaja will be called Abode of Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three leagues. Weapon of the Capable will be his father. Leader of Goddesses will be his mother. God of the Water Gods will be his son. Insight Crown will be his attendant. Highest Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Dharma Glory will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be nine hundred million hearers, [119.b] in the second there will be eight hundred million, and in the third there will be seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$196 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Amitabuddhi will be called Flower Parasol. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven leagues. Red Eye will be his father. Nāga Gift will be his mother. Beauty will be his son. Divine Excellence will be his attendant. Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Leisurely Movement will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million hearers, in the second there will be five hundred million, and in the third there will be four hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$197 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Surūpa will be called Splendid. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirteen leagues. Lord of Joy will be his father. Joyous will be his mother. Accomplishment of the Welfare of Beings will be his son. Guru Gift will be his attendant. Vast Merit will be foremost in terms of insight. Undaunted will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred million, and in the third there will be one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$198 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Jñānin will be called Array of Bliss. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend fourteen leagues. Given by the Sages will be his father. Immaterial will be his mother. Hero will be his son. Ever Joyous will be his attendant. [120.a]Conduct will be foremost in terms of insight. Gentle will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be two hundred twenty million hearers, in the second there will be two hundred ten million, and in the third there will be two hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$199 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Raśmi will be called Beryl Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty-three leagues. Enjoying to Help will be his father. Happy Mind will be his mother. Aspiring Mind will be his son. Delighting in Ritual will be his attendant. Delighting in Pleasing the Noble will be foremost in terms of insight. Friend of the Vinaya will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be two hundred eighty million hearers, in the second there will be eight hundred seventy million, and in the third there will be eight hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$200 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Dṛḍhavrata will be called Sun Wish. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Divine Joy will be his father. Melody of Fine Mind will be his mother. Master Gift will be his son. Pleasing Melody will be his attendant. Gift of the Sun will be foremost in terms of insight. Honey will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one billion hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred seventy million, and in the third there will be nine hundred fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for four hundred million years. [120.b] His relics will be abundant.
$201 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Maṅgala will be called Joyous Training. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy leagues. King of the Mind will be his father. Flower Light will be his mother. Infinite Hand will be his son. Royal Friend will be his attendant. Source of Dharma will be foremost in terms of insight. Victorious Friend will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be five hundred million hearers, in the second there will be four hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be four hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$202 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Satyaketu will be called Joyous Proclamation. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Support for Merit will be his father. Endowed with Excellence will be his mother. Delightful to Hear will be his son. Supreme Friend will be his attendant. Excellent Moon will be foremost in terms of insight. Śāla Eye will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be eight hundred million hearers, in the second there will be seven hundred million, and in the third there will be six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$203 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Padma will be called Splendor of Blooming Flowers. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twelve leagues. Wealth Gift will be his father. Joyous will be his mother. Light of Merit will be his son. Hard to Achieve will be his attendant. Dharma Light will be foremost in terms of insight. [121.a]Great Medicine will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be ten thousand hearers, in the second there will be ninety-nine thousand, and in the third there will be ninety-eight thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be five hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$204 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Nārāyaṇa will be called Stable Borders. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five leagues. Eye of Joy will be his father. Excellent Gift will be his mother. Excellence will be his son. Crown Jewel will be his attendant. Friend of Awakening will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon Countenance will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be six hundred million hearers, in the second there will be five hundred million, and in the third there will be nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twelve thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$205 “The birthplace of the thus-gone Subāhu will be called Happy Mind. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three leagues. Infinite Jewels will be his father. Highest Intelligence will be his mother. Master of Retention will be his son. Wrathful will be his attendant. Radiant Moon will be foremost in terms of insight. Lion Crest will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be nine hundred sixty million hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred forty million, and in the third there will be nine hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$206 “The birthplace of the buddha Jñānākara
Will be the city called Wealth of Merit.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will cover ten leagues. [121.b]
$207 “His father will be Freedom from Suffering and his mother Ocean of Joy.
Sincere will be his son and Gift of Excellence his attendant.
The expert will be Superior True Wisdom
And Merit Joy the one endowed with miracles.
$208 “In his first congregation will be one hundred million.
In the second there will be eighty million, and in the third there will be seventy million.
His lifespan will be eighty thousand years,
And his sacred Dharma will endure five times as long as that.
$209 “The relics of that victor will be abundant.
Whoever recites the name of this thus-gone one
Even for just an instant
Will quickly reach awakening.
$210 “The thus-gone Guṇārci will be born
In the city called Medicine.
His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend ten leagues.
His father will be Land of Excellence,
$211 “His mother, Freedom from Suffering, and his son, Fame.
His attendant will be called Beautiful,
The scholar will be Crest, and Clear Knowledge of the Heard will possess miracles.
In his first congregation will be eight hundred billion,
$212 “In the second there will be seven hundred eighty billion,
And in the third there will be seven hundred fifty billion.
The lifespan of humans will reach
Two hundred twenty billion years,
$213 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-three thousand years.
From this lamp for the world
Endowed with infinite fame
Will emerge abundant relics.
$214 “The well-gone Brahmadatta
Will be born in a land called Joyous Proclamation.
The family of that victor will be brahmin.
His radiance will reach seventy-six leagues,
His father will be Brahmā, and his mother Highest Brahmā.
$215 “Instiller of Joy will be his son and Excellent Youth his attendant.
The scholar will be Moonlight
And Proclamation of Gifts the one of miracles.
In his first congregation will gather
$216 “Nine hundred ninety billion worthy ones.
In the second will be nine hundred sixty billion,
And in the third there will be nine hundred fifty billion.
The lifespan of this victor
$217 “Will be seventy-two thousand years, [122.a]
And the sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
His relics will manifest in a single stūpa.
The thus-gone Ratnākara
$218 “Will be born in the city called Excellence.
His light will extend sixty leagues.
Medicine will be his father, and Excellent Sun and Moon his mother.
Supreme Jewel will be his son,
$219 “And Excellent Intelligence his attendant.
Joyous Sight will be the scholar
And Moon the one of miracles.
In his first congregation will be ten thousand,
$220 “In the second there will be sixty-six thousand,
And in the third there will be sixty thousand.
The lifespan of that victor
Will be ninety-two thousand years,
$221 “And the sacred Dharma will remain five times as long.
His relics will be abundant,
And as they gloriously increase,
The relics of the one who strode like the leader of the herd or a lion
$222 “Will receive offerings and worship.
The birthplace of the teacher Kusumadeva
Will be the city known as Flower Parasol.
His family will be brahmin, and his light
$223 “Will reach across twenty-two leagues.
Excellent Mind will be his father and Lotus Possessor his mother.
Ruler of Men will be his son and Holder of the Essence Treasury will be his attendant.
Supreme Moon will be worshiped for his insight
$224 “And Moonlight will be the one of miraculous abilities.
In the first congregation there will be three billion,
In the second there will be two billion,
And in third, one billion.
$225 “His lifespan will be ten million years and the sacred Dharma will remain thrice as long.
There will be a single stūpa of this guide
At which men and women
Will offer supreme veneration and vast gifts,
$226 “Thereby reaching supreme awakening.
The birthplace of the thus-gone Sucintitārtha
Will be known as Bright Merit.
His family will be brahmin,
$227 “And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Excellent Merit will be his father and Faithful his mother.
Miracle will be his son and Virtue his attendant.
Ocean Treasury will be the scholar [122.b]
$228 “And Power of Merit the one with miraculous abilities.
In the first congregation there will be one hundred thousand,
In the second there will be eighty thousand, and in the third there will be sixty thousand.
The lifespan of human beings
$229 “Will be eighty-four thousand years, and so will his.
His sacred Dharma will remain
For ninety-two thousand years.
This liberator from existence, endowed with infinite fame,
$230 “Will leave abundant relics.
The thus-gone Dharmeśvara
Will be born in a place called Mind Crest.
His family will be brahmin,
$231 “And his light will extend ten leagues.
Excellent Gift will be his father and Melody of Learning his mother.
Endowed with Merit will be his son and Excellent Joy his attendant.
The one with supreme insight and the one of miracles
$232 “Will both be called Vision.
The first congregation will contain three hundred twenty million.
In the second there will be two hundred ten million,
And the third, three hundred million.
$233 “His lifespan will be thirty-six thousand years,
And his supreme teachings of sacred Dharma
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
There will be twenty-one stūpas
$234 “Abounding with banners and splendid glory.
The thus-gone Yaśomati
Will be born at a place called Light of Merit.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$235 “And his light will extend two leagues.
His father will be Excellent Youth and his mother Gold Garland.
Excellent Wealth will be his son and Intelligent his attendant.
The wise expert will be King of the Gathering
$236 “And Gift of the Victors will be the one with miraculous abilities.
In the first congregation of this holy master of the gathering
Will be thirty thousand worthy ones,
In the second there will be twenty thousand, and in the third there will be ten thousand.
$237 “His lifespan will be a thousand years;
His sacred Dharma will remain twenty million years.
The relics of this accumulator of all good qualities,
The source of wisdom, the knower of the world,
Will be abundant, and there will likewise be sixty-two stūpas. [123.a]
$238 “The supreme human, Pratibhānakūṭa,
Will be born in the city called Immaculate.
He will be a member of a great kṣatriya family
And his light will shine across sixty-two leagues.
$239 “Glorious Faith will be his father and Appreciation his mother.
Nonoccurrence will be his son and Possessor of Lightning his attendant.
Perfect Moonlight will be the scholar
And Solid Armor the one of miracles.
$240 “In the first congregation of that sage
Will be eight hundred twenty billion;
In the second there will be eight hundred ten billion; and in the third there will be eight hundred billion.
His lifespan will be nine thousand years,
$241 “And the sacred Dharma will remain twenty million years.
His relics will also be abundant,
And even if someone just dreams of them
They will attain this absorption.#132
$242 “The supreme human, Vajradhvaja,
Will be born in a place known as Endowed with Gold.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$243 “Sun and Moon will be his father and Excellent Moon his mother.
Joyous Sight will be his son and Jewel Light his attendant.
Melody of Powerful Movement will be endowed with insight
And Abiding Mind That Holds the Dharma will possess miraculous abilities.
$244 “In his first congregation there will be
Three billion six hundred million worthy ones;
In the second there will be three billion four hundred million;
In the third, three billion three hundred million; and the lifespan of this victor will be ten thousand years.
$245 “The sacred Dharma of this supreme human
Will remain for three hundred thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa of this guide,
And its light will shine across thirteen leagues.
$246 “The guide of the world known as Hitaiṣin
Will be born in a place called Delightful Sight.
The family of this thus-gone one will be brahmin,
His light will extend two leagues, and Excellent Hand will be his father.
$247 “Utpala Eye will be his mother, Jewel Crest will be his son,
Endowed with Fame will be his attendant, [123.b]
Endowed with the Splendor of Supreme Gold will be the possessor of insight,
And the monk, Luminous Clouds, will be endowed with miraculous abilities.
$248 “In the first congregation there will be
One hundred eighty million undefiled hearers;
In the second there will be just as many; and in the third, two hundred million.
His lifespan will be twelve thousand years.
$249 “After that guide has attained nirvāṇa,
His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
And there will be seventy-four billion stūpas.
$250 “The thus-gone Vikrīḍitāvin
Will be born in a place called Worshiped by Gods.
His family will be kṣatriya and his net of light rays
Will extend across fourteen leagues.
$251 “Exquisite Excellence will be his father and Ravishing his mother.
Highest Fame will be his son and Supreme his attendant.
Endowed with Religious Conduct will be the one of insight
And Jewel Moon the one of miracles.
$252 “In the first congregation there will be
Fifty thousand monks inclined to meditation.
In the second will be sixty thousand,
And in the third sixty-five thousand.
$253 “The lifespan of humans will be two thousand years,
And the thus-gone one’s sacred Dharma
Will remain complete for eleven thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa of suffering transcended,
$254 “Which will be adorned with a thousand parasols the size of three leagues.
The thus-gone Vigatatamas will be born
In a place called Adorned with Lotuses.
His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend ten leagues.
$255 “Merit Joy will be his father and Luminous Qualities his mother.
Moon Gift will be his son
And Gentle his attendant.
Moon Joy will be the one of insight
$256 “And Jewel Banner the one of miracles.
In the first gathering will be
Two hundred thirty million hearers; in the second there will be
Two hundred ten million; and in third, two hundred million.
$257 “His lifespan will be twenty-five thousand years,
And after his attaining nirvāṇa the Dharma teachings
Will remain complete for fifty thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
$258 “And there will be nine hundred forty million stūpas. [124.a]
The victorious Rāhudeva will be born
In a place known as Source of Excellence.
His family will be brahmin,
$259 “And his light will extend three and half leagues.
Excellent Fame will be his father and Fortunate Wish his mother.
Jewel Light will be his son
And Infinite Form his attendant.
$260 “Diligent Strength will be the one of insight
And Moon Countenance the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be ten million worthy ones,
In the second there will be sixty million, and in the third there will be fifty million.
$261 “His lifespan will be eighty thousand years,
And his sacred Dharma will flourish for long.
There will be a single stūpa of this guide,
Adorned with five hundred parasols the size of a league.
$262 “The king of Dharma, Merudhvaja,
Will be born in a place called Victorious.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend two krośas.
$263 “Excellent Splendor will be his father and Light of Bliss his mother.
Dharma Excellence will be his son and Saṅgila his attendant.
Luminous Conduct will be the one of insight
And Glorious Freedom from Suffering will be the one of miracles.
$264 “In the first congregation there will be one hundred billion,
In the second there will be ninety billion, and in the third there will be eighty million.
The lifespan of men and women
Will be twenty-two thousand years.
$265 “When this guide of the world has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
His precious relics will remain together
Within a single stūpa adorned with one thousand different parasols.
$266 “The well-gone Gaṇiprabha
Will be born in a place known as Land of Happiness.
His family will be kṣatriya and his light
Will extend across thirty leagues.
$267 “God of Excellence will be his father, Splendid Enjoyment his mother,
Bright Blue his son, and Fame of Excellent Mind his attendant.
Possessor of the Roar will be the one of insight
And Delighting in Reasoning the one of miracles.
$268 “In the first congregation there will be one billion worthy ones, [124.b]
In the second there will be nine hundred million, and in the third there will be eight hundred million.
At that time the lifespan of humans
Will be eighty-four thousand years.
$269 “When that thus-gone one has attained nirvāṇa
The Dharma will remain intact for thirty million years.
The relics of that victorious one will be abundant
And there will be six hundred million stūpas.
$270 “The thus-gone Ratnagarbha
Will be born in a place called Moon of Excellent Flowers.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twelve leagues.
$271 “Fine Mountain will be his father and Glorious Moon his mother.
Golden Light will be his son and Ocean his attendant.
Lion Strength will be the one of insight
And Merit Joy the one of miracles.
$272 “In the first congregation there will be eight hundred million hearers;
In the second there will be same amount;
And in the third there will be nine hundred sixty million.
Beyond that there will be an inconceivable amount of hearers.
$273 “His lifespan will be eighty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
And there will be ten million stūpas adorned with thousands of parasols.
$274 “The thus-gone Atyuccagāmin will be born
In a place called Supreme Excellence.
His family will be brahmin and his light
Will pervade across six leagues.
$275 “Fine and Noble Mind will be his father and Meritorious his mother.
Excellent Steps will be his son and Powerful his attendant.
Excellent Attention will be the one of insight
And Joyous Leader the one of miracles.
$276 “In the first congregation there will be
Nine hundred forty million worthy ones,
In the second there will be thirty million,
And in the third there will be eight hundred million.
$277 “The lifespan of humans will be a thousand years,
And upon attaining nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa measuring two leagues
$278 “And adorned with ten million parasols.
The supreme human, Tiṣya,
Will be born in a place called Jewel Lamp. [125.a]
The thus-gone one’s family will be kṣatriya
$279 “And his light will extend eight leagues.
Excellent Steps will be his father, Excellent Form his mother, and Sage his son.
Excellent Melody of Dharma will be his attendant.
Jewel Joy will be the one of insight
$280 “And Gift of the Stable the one of miracles.
In the first congregation of those free from the three stains
Will assemble three hundred sixty million,
In the second three hundred fifty million, and in the third three hundred forty million.
$281 “His lifespan will be seventy-seven thousand years,
And when this supreme being has attained parinirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for six hundred twenty million years.
There will be a single stūpa dedicated to nirvāṇa,
$282 “Adorned with a hundred million banners.
The thus-gone Viṣāṇin will be born
In a place called Glorious Luminosity.
His family will be kṣatriya,
$283 “And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Endowed with Wealth will be his father and Infinite Qualities his mother.
Joy of Awakening will be his son and Glorious his attendant.
Swift Sharpness will be the one of insight
$284 And Jasmine Flower the one of miracles.
In the first congregation will gather
Forty-six thousand hearers endowed with meditation.
In the second will be thirty-five thousand and in the third sixty thousand.
At that time the lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$285 “And when that supreme human has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain ten million years.
His relics will be abundant,
And there will be thirty-five billion stūpas.
$286 “The incomparable person Guṇakīrti
Will be born in a place called Jewel Lamp.
The family of this guide will be kṣatriya
And his light will extend three leagues.
$287 “God of Excellence will be his father and Extreme Beauty his mother.
Jewel will be his son and Sage his attendant.
Eloquent Joy will be the one of insight
And Wisdom Master the one of miracles.
$288 “In the first congregation there will be six billion,
In the second there will be seven billion, and in the third there will be eight billion.
His lifespan will be twenty-one thousand years, [125.b]
And upon his attaining nirvāṇa the sacred Dharma will remain five years.
$289 “When that supreme human has attained nirvāṇa
There will be ninety-six billion stūpas.
His teachings will be such
That not a single person goes to the lower realms.
$290 “The thus-gone Candrārka will be born
In a place called Sound of Wealth.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend eighteen leagues.
$291 “Moon will be his father and Crest Light his mother.
Excellent Mind will be his son and Gatherer his attendant.
Liberator from Existence will be the one of insight
And Flower Light the one of miracles.
$292 “In the first congregation there will be ten million worthy ones,
In the second fifty million, and in the third one hundred million.
His lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years,
And when that guide has attained nirvāṇa
$293 “The sacred Dharma will remain for twenty million years.
His relics will be abundant,
And there will be nine million nine hundred thousand stūpas in the various directions,
Each of them adorned with a thousand parasols.
$294 “The victorious Sūryaprabha will be born
In a place called Ten Light Rays.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eighty-eight leagues.
$295 “Ruler of Men will be his father and Golden Color his mother.
Worship will be his son and Mountain his attendant.
Source of Merit will be the one of insight
And Joyous Excellence the one of miracles.
$296 “In the first congregation there will be seven hundred sixty thousand worthy monks,
In the second eight hundred thousand, and in the third nine hundred thousand.
His lifespan will be ninety-two thousand years,
And when this supreme human has attained nirvāṇa
$297 “The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
There will be a single stūpa
Adorned with eighty thousand parasols across four leagues.
The guide of humans, Jyotiṣka,
$298 “Will be born in a place called Looking with Joy.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
God of Excellence will be his father and Meritorious Intelligence his mother. [126.a]
$299 “Ruler of Men will be his son and Supreme his attendant.
Divine Joy will be the one of insight
And Exquisite Excellence supreme in terms of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be ninety-nine trillion,
$300 “And from then on the gathering of hearers will be infinite.
His lifespan will be ten million years,
And when this guide has attained parinirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years.
$301 “There will be a single stūpa of this guide of humans,
Adorned with two thousand two hundred parasols.
The thus-gone Siṃhaketu will be born
In a place called Continuum of Joy.
$302 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will cover one hundred leagues.
Deer Holder will be his father and White Lotus his mother.
Beautiful will be his son
$303 “And Radiant Splendor his attendant.
Mountain Free from Suffering will be the one of insight
And Virtuous Glory the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be six thousand hearers,
$304 “In the second five thousand, and in the third four thousand.
His lifespan will be seventy-one thousand years,
And upon his attaining nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-five million years.
$305 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be ninety-two billion stūpas.
The lord of humans, Velāmarāja,
Will be born in a place called Delightful Sight.
$306 “The family of this thus-gone one will be brahmin
And his light will cover six leagues.
Given by the Gods will be his father and Irreproachable his mother.
Cloud will be his son and Glory his attendant.
$307 “Blaze will be the supreme scholar
And Strength of Concentration the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be two hundred twenty million
Worthy ones who have exhausted contaminants and are free from defilements.
$308 “In the second will be two hundred thirty million, and in the third there will be two hundred twenty million.
The lifespan of humans will be five hundred years,
And when this destroyer of saṃsāra has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for two thousand years. [126.b]
$309 “The relics of this victor will remain together in a single stūpa,
The golden life-pillar of which will rise one league tall.
The one who liberates from existence, Śrīgarbha,
Will be born in a place called Delighting People.
$310 “His family will be brahmin and his light will cover one league.
Moon Power will be his father, Ube his mother, and Moon his son.
Faculty of Joyous Diligence will be his attendant,
Wealth Source will be the supreme scholar,
$311 “And Master of Meditation the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be fifty-four thousand
Monks of stainless realization.
In the second there will be sixty thousand, and in the third there will be eighty thousand.
$312 “His lifespan will be fifty thousand years,
And his sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years.
Covering four leagues, the single stūpa of this supreme human
Will be shielded by parasols and draped with nets of bells.
$313 “The thus-gone Bhavāntadarśin will be born
In a place called Seen with Delight.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will cover thirty-three leagues.
$314 “Subjugator will be his father and Moon Petals his mother;
Fierce Lord will be his son and Hidden his attendant.
Radiant Arising will be the supreme scholar
And Moving like the Wind the one of miracles.
$315 “In the first congregation there will be eighty thousand monks,
In the second there will be ninety thousand, and in the third there will be ten million.
His lifespan will be one hundred thousand years,
And after his attaining nirvāṇa
$316 “The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
From this thus-gone one free from doubts
Will issue abundant relics
And there will be nine hundred and ten billion stūpas.
$317 “The thus-gone Vidyutprabha will be born
In a place called Medicine.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will cover two leagues.
$318 “Master of Bliss will be his father and Branches of Joy his mother;
Firm Strength will be his son and Dharma his attendant.
Wealth God will be the supreme scholar [127.a]
And Glorious Intent the one of miracles.
$319 “In the first congregation there will be eighty
Worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements.
In the second there will be twice that amount, and in the third there will be thrice the same.
His lifespan will be two thousand years,
$320 “And after that victor has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa dedicated to nirvāṇa
Shaded by six thousand two hundred parasols.
$321 “The protector of the world, Kanakaparvata,
Will be born in a place called Making Proud.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will cover two leagues.
$322 “Luminous will be his father and Supreme Virtue his mother;
Perfectly Auspicious will be his son and Dharma his attendant.
Superior Dharma will be the scholar
And Crest of Humanity the one of miracles.
$323 “In the first congregation thirty thousand worthy ones will gather;
In the second will be twenty-eight thousand,
And in the third there will be twenty thousand.
His lifespan will be nine thousand years,
$324 “And his sacred Dharma will remain intact
For thirty-two thousand years.
Also, his relics will be abundant.
The one of vision, Siṃhadatta,
$325 “Will be born in a place called Supreme Jewel.
This protector’s family will be kṣatriya
And his light will cover sixty-five leagues.
Endowed with Dharma will be his father and Moon Possessor his mother;
$326 “Jewel will be his son and Lightning his attendant.
Joyous Wisdom will be the scholar
And Great Joy the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be four million monks
$327 “Who have exhausted existence.
In the second will be four million two hundred thousand
And in the third there will be four million three hundred thousand.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years.
$328 “After this thus-gone one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa dedicated to nirvāṇa.
The well-gone Aparājita­dhvaja will be born [127.b]
$329 In a place called Endowed with Flowers.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one league.
$330 “Master of the Gathering will be his father and Supreme Body his mother;
Strength of Qualities will be his son and Rāhu his attendant.
Leader will be the scholar
And Great Cloud the one of miracles.
$331 “In the first congregation there will be three billion
Supreme sages who are worthy ones.
In the second will be two billion, and in third, one billion.
At that time the lifespan of humans will be one thousand years.
$332 “After he has attained nirvāṇa,
His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years.
There will be ten million stūpas dedicated to nirvāṇa
And the sacred relics will increase.
$333 “The thus-gone Pramodyakīrti will be born
In a place called Supreme Joy.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will cover ten leagues.
$334 “Fine Feast will be his father and Cloud Bearer his mother;
King will be his son and Living Being his attendant.
Joyous Discipline will be the one of insight
And Nectar Strength the one of miracles.
$335 “In the first congregation there will be sixty million,
In the second there will be fifty million, and in the third there will be twenty million.
At that time the lifespan of the guide
Will be eighty-two thousand years.
$336 “After the guide has attained nirvāṇa,
The sacred Dharma will remain for twenty million years.
There will be seven million two hundred thousand stūpas
Adorned with banners and shaded by thousands of parasols.
$337 “The one of infinite qualities, Dṛḍhavīrya,
Will be born in a place called Delightful Joy.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will cover one league.
$338 “Freedom from Suffering will be his father and Endowed with Flowers his mother.
Wealthy will be his son and Fame his attendant.
Radiant King will be the one of insight
And Practice of the Good Objective the one of miracles.
$339 “Five billion six hundred million monks will gather.
In the second congregation will be five billion, [128.a]
And in the third there will be five billion four hundred million.
At that time the lifespan of humans will be three thousand years.
$340 “After he has attained nirvāṇa,
His sacred Dharma will remain for four hundred million years.
There will be a single stūpa dedicated to nirvāṇa,
Measuring three leagues and adorned with parasols throughout.
$341 “The thus-gone Saṃpannakīrti will be born
In a place called Center of the Land of Excellence.
This victor’s family will be kṣatriya
And his light will cover one league.
$342 “Tree Trunk will be his father and Incomparable his mother;
Divine Joy will be his son
And Joyful Sustenance his attendant.
Crest will be the scholar and Elephant the one of miracles.
$343 “In the first congregation there will be two billion two hundred million worthy ones;
In the second there will be double that amount; and in the third there will be three times that many.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years.
And after he has attained nirvāṇa,
$344 “His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty-six thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
And there will be three billion two hundred million stūpas.
The thus-gone Vigatabhaya will be born
$345 “In a place called Flower Ornament.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will cover ten thousand leagues.
Fine and Noble Mind will be his father and Dharma Master his mother.
$346 “Miracle will be his son and Conqueror his attendant.
Cutting through Doubt will be the one of insight
And Unwavering Yogic Discipline the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be eighty trillion meditators;
$347 “In the second there will be seventy trillion; in the third sixty trillion;
And in all the others there will be one billion.
The lifespan of humans will be three hundred sixty million years,
And his sacred Dharma will remain for three hundred eighty million years.
$348 “His relics will remain in one collection within a five-league large stūpa.
The thus-gone Arhaddeva will be born
In a place called Joyous Mind.
His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend a league. [128.b]
$349 “Radiant Sacrifice will be his father and Dharma Excellence his mother.
God of Excellence will be his son
And Supreme Courage his attendant.
Beautiful Moon will be the one of insight
$350 “And Indomitable Strength the one of miracles.
In the first congregation of the fearless
Will be fifty-six thousand.
In the second there will be sixty thousand, and in the third there will be sixty-five thousand.
$351 “His lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years,
And when this lord of the land has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
There will be six hundred million stūpas
$352 “Adorned with parasols, banners, and half-moons.
The thus-gone Mahāpradīpa will be born
In a place called Excellent Joy.
His family will be brahmin,
$353 “And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Excellent Eye will be his father and Supreme Branches his mother.
Beautiful Melody will be his son and Virtue his attendant.
Practice of the Good Objective will be the one of insight
$354 “And Given by the Sages the one of miracles.
The sages of the saṅgha who participate in the first congregation
Will number three billion.
In the second will be two billion, and in the third there will be one billion.
$355 “At that time, the lifespan of humans
Will be eighty-six thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
His relics will remain in one collection and there will be a single stūpa,
$356 “Measuring three leagues and adorned
By a thousand parasols and jewel nets.
The thus-gone Lokaprabha will be born
In a place called Joyous World.
$357 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one league.
Glorious Excellence will be his father and Jasmine Flower his mother.
Delighting People will be his son and Fire his attendant.
$358 “Joyous Sage of Victorious Gatherings will be the one of insight
And Fame the one of miracles.
In the first congregation of this supreme human
Will be ninety-nine thousand monks.
$359 “In the second will be ninety-eight thousand,
And in the third there will be ninety-seven thousand.
His lifespan will be twenty-five thousand years, [129.a]
And the sacred Dharma will remain for five times as long.
$360 “His relics will be abundant, and the great ornamented stūpas
Will number nine hundred twenty million.
The thus-gone Surabhigandha will be born
In a place called Incense Ornament.
$361 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will span three thousand continents.
Excellent Merit will be his father and World Holder his mother.
Excellent Sight will be his son and Mountain his attendant.
$362 “Supreme Person will be the scholar
And Worshiped by Gods the one of miracles.
Forty million worthy ones will gather in the first congregation.
$363 “In the second will be thirty million, and twenty million in the third.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years.
The sacred Dharma will remain in his buddha realm
For twenty million years after he has passed beyond.
$364 “There will be a single stūpa measuring six leagues
 And adorned with ornaments throughout.
The thus-gone Guṇāgradhārin will be born
In a place called Adorned with Joy.
$365 “The family of this supreme human will be kṣatriya
And his light will span three krośas.
Flower will be his father and Bliss Maker his mother.
Wealthy will be his son and Sound of Thunder his attendant.
$366 “At that time Supreme Fame will be the one of insight
And Radiant the one of miracles.
Two billion worthy ones will gather in the first congregation.
In the second will be five billion,
$367 “And in the third will be hundred thirty billion.
The lifespan then will be thirty million years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for five hundred years.
There will be a single collection of relics
$368 “And the stūpa will be two leagues tall,
 Adorned with a hundred thousand parasols, ornaments, and precious flowers.
The thus-gone Vigatatamas will be born
In a place called Endowed with Merit.
$369 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend fourteen leagues.
Great Sage will be his father and Perfectly Auspicious his mother.
Dharma Speaker will be his son and Fine Face his attendant.
$370 “Excellent Glory will be the great scholar [129.b]
And Source of Qualities the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will nine hundred ten million,
In the second there will be seven hundred million,
$371 “And in the third there will be will seven hundred sixty million.
His lifespan will be five hundred years,
And the sacred Dharma of this guide of the world
Will remain for forty-six thousand years.
$372 “His relics will be abundant
And adorned with eight hundred million fine banners.
The thus-gone Siṃhahanu will be born
At a place called Endowed with Virtue.
$373 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twelve leagues.
Fine and Noble Mind will be his father and Light of Bliss his mother.
Banner of Excellent Qualities will be his son and Truth his attendant.
$374 “Dharma Wish will be the scholar
And Stūpa for the World the one of miracles.
Eighty thousand serene sages
Will gather in the first congregation of the saṅgha.
$375 “The sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years,
And his relics will multiply.
The thus-gone Ratnakīrti will be born
In a place called Essence of Merit.
$376 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Exquisite Excellence will be his father
And Jewel Uṣṇīṣa his mother.
$377 “Supreme Mountain will be his son and Conqueror his attendant.
Lamp of Insight will be the scholar
And Crown Jewel the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be one billion who have exhausted existence;
In the second will be five billion;
$378 “And in the third there will be nine billion.
His lifespan will be one thousand years,
And after this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years.
$379 “There will be ten billion stūpas
Made of the seven precious substances.
The thus-gone Praśāntadoṣa will be born
At a place called Joyful.
$380 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-two leagues. [130.a]
Wealthy will be his father and Endowed with Excellence his mother.
Beautiful Melody will be his son and Luminous his attendant.
$381 Light of Dharma Glory will be the scholar
And Meaningful Speech the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be sixty-three thousand
Worthy ones with powerful miraculous abilities.
$382 “In the second will be sixty-two thousand
And in the third there will be sixty-one thousand.
At that time the lifespan will be ninety-six thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for twenty million years.
$383 “In a single stūpa dedicated to the teacher’s nirvāṇa
The relics will remain as a single collection.
The thus-gone Amṛtadhārin will be born
In a place called Endowed with Excellence.
$384 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend sixteen leagues.
Excellent Brahmā will be his father and Endowed with Flowers his mother.
Moon Gift will be his son and Powerful Conqueror his attendant.
$385 “Luminous Wisdom will be the scholar
And Great Light the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be nine billion worthy ones,
In the second there will be eight billion, and in the third there will be likewise eight billion.
$386 “The lifespan of the supreme buddha of that time
Will be seventy-six thousand years,
And after this well-gone one has attained parinirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
$387 “There will be nine hundred ninety billion stūpas
Adorned with jeweled parasols.
The thus-gone Manujacandra will be born
In a place called Joyous Gathering.
$388 “His family will be brahmin and his light will extend one league.
Excellent will be this well-gone one’s father
And Cloud Bearer his mother.
Excellent Sight will be his son and Mountain his attendant.
$389 “Supreme Jewel will be the teacher of insight
And Jambu River the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be one hundred billion worthy ones,
In the second there will be eighty billion,
$390 “And in the third there will be fifty-five billion.
His lifespan will be six million years,
And after this well-gone one has attained parinirvāṇa [130.b]
The sacred Dharma will remain for twenty million years.
$391 “There will be seven hundred sixty million stūpas
And hundreds of cymbals will ring throughout the three worlds.
The thus-gone Sudarśana will be born
In a place called Endowed with Produce.
$392 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Excellent Merit will be his father and Delightful Speech his mother.
Dharma Excellence will be his son and Moon his attendant.
$393 “Perfection of Insight will be the scholar
And Foremost Speaker the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be nine hundred million
Worthy ones who have overcome aging and disease.
$394 “In the second congregation there will be eight hundred million,
And in the third there will be eight hundred seventy million.
The lifespan of humans will be one billion years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for eighty million years.
$395 “The stūpas of the teacher’s nirvāṇa
Will number seven hundred thirty billion.
The thus-gone Pratimaṇḍita will be born
In a place called Stūpa.
$396 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seven leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father and Splendid his mother.
Free from Suffering will be his son and Indomitable his attendant.
$397 “Defeater of Others will be the scholar
And Delightful Roar the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be seven hundred twenty million
Liberators from existence who have reached peace.
$398 “In the second congregation will be seven hundred ten million,
And in the third there will be seven hundred million who have crushed pride.
The lifespan of this knower of the world
Will be ninety-nine thousand years.
$399 “After his nirvāṇa, the sacred Dharma
Will remain for ten million years and the relics will not be dispersed.
The thus-gone Maṇiprabha will be born
In a place called Splendor of Blooming Flowers.
$400 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Excellent Moon will be his father and Jewel Moon his mother.
Fortunate Wish will be his son and Crest his attendant.
$401 “King of Medicine will be the scholar
And Delighting People the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be ninety billion
Monks who are worthy sages. [131.a]
$402 “In the second congregation will be eighty billion, and in the third there will be seventy billion.
His lifespan will be ten million years,
And after this well-gone one has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain intact for thirty million years.
$403 “There will be nine hundred ninety billion stūpas
Adorned with crowns.
The buddha Girikūṭaketu will be born
In a place called Sandalwood.
$404 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Excellent Youth will be his father and Supreme Flower his mother.
Light Holder will be his son and Supreme Dharma his attendant.
$405 “Dharma Lamp will be the scholar
And Luminous Movement the one of miracles.
In the first congregation will gather
Seven hundred forty billion who have relinquished#133 the body.
$406 “In the second will be seven hundred thirty billion, and in the third seven hundred twenty billion.
His lifespan will be seventy thousand years,
And after this buddha who benefits the world
Has attained nirvāṇa,
$407 “His sacred Dharma will remain ninety-six thousand years
And there will be a single, unfragmented stūpa.
The buddha Dharmākara will be born
In a place called Endowed with Flowers.
$408 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Excellent Merit will be his father and Endowed with Merit his mother.
Endowed with Śāla Fragrance will be his son and Awakening his attendant.
$409 “Speech Conqueror will be the scholar
And Steadfast Yogic Discipline the one of miracles.
In the first congregation nine hundred forty million
Worthy ones will gather.
$410 “In the second will be nine hundred thirty, and in the third there will be nine hundred forty.
His lifespan will be eighty thousand years,
And after this victorious one has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years,
$411 “And there will be nine hundred sixty million stūpas,
All adorned with jewel nets.
The buddha Harṣadatta#134 will be born
In a place called Adorned with Flowers.
$412 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-two million leagues. [131.b]
Excellent Birth will be his father and Śāla Light his mother.
Endowed with Excellence will be his son and Radiant his attendant.
$413 “Glorious Victor will be the scholar
And Light Gift the one of miracles.
In the first congregation thirty-two thousand
Worthy ones who have vanquished birth will gather.
$414 “In the second gathering will be twenty-nine thousand,
And in the third there will be twenty-eight thousand.
The lifespan of human beings
Will be twenty-two thousand years,
$415 “And upon attaining nirvāṇa the sacred Dharma will remain thrice as long.
There will be a single relic and a single stūpa of this well-gone one.
The buddha Ratnākara will be born
In a place called Moon Bearer.
$416 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend two leagues.
Free from Suffering will be his father and Endowed with Merit his mother.
Excellent Sight will be his son and Supreme his attendant.
$417 “Wisdom Gift will be the scholar
And Lion Joy the one of miracles.
In the first congregation will gather ninety billion
Liberators from birth, aging, and death.
$418 “In the second gathering will be ninety-five billion
And in the third there will be ninety-six billion.
The lifespan of human beings will be one hundred years,
And upon attaining nirvāṇa
$419 “The sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa, measuring one league.
The thus-gone Janendrakalpa will be born
In a place called Sight.
$420 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty leagues.
Fine Incense will be his father and Possessor of Jewels his mother.
Joyous Beauty will be his son and Aspiration his attendant.
$421 “Ocean Mind will be the one of great insight
And Gift of Radiance the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be ninety billion,
In the second there will be eighty-eight billion,
$422 “And in the third there will be eighty-six billion.
The lifespan of human beings will be one hundred thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for a hundred million years.
There will be nine hundred eighty million stūpas [132.a]
$423 “Adorned with banners, parasols, and crests.
For each stūpa there will be ten million parasols.
The thus-gone Vikrāntagāmin will be born
In a place called Flower Light.
$424 “His family will be brahmin,
And the net of his radiance will reach twenty-two leagues.
Majestic Mountain will be the father of this victor; Joy will be his mother.
Mind of Excellent Qualities will be his son;
$425 “Friend of Existence will be his attendant.
Close Force will be the one of insight and Strong Support the one of miracles.
In the first congregation of this supreme human
Will be three thousand two hundred worthy ones.
$426 “In the second will be three thousand three hundred.
In the great third assembly there will be one billion.
The lifespan of this guide of humans
Will be ninety-four thousand years,
$427 “And the sacred Dharma will remain thrice as long.
The relics will remain in a single collection within a single stūpa.
The guide of the world, Sthitabuddhi,
Will be born in a place called Joy of Splendid Jewels.
$428 “His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend one league.
Glorious Merit will be his father and Excellent Joy his mother.
Water God will be his son and Divine Joy his attendant.
Merit Lamp will be the one of insight
$429 “And Sound of Thunder the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be one billion worthy ones.
In the second there will be eight hundred million who have exhausted existence,
And in the third there will be six hundred million.
$430 The lifespan of human beings at that time
Will be twenty-four thousand years,
And upon attaining nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for five hundred thousand years.
$431 “There will be five billion stūpas,
All adorned with beautiful jewel parasols.
The guide of the world, Vibhrājacchattra,
Will be born in a place called Heap of Jewels.
$432 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his splendid light will extend ten million leagues.
Sound Bearer God will be his father and Endowed with Flowers his mother.
Conqueror will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
$433 “Worshiped by Gods will be the one of insight
And Magadha the one of miracles.
Thirty-three billion worthy ones will gather. [132.b]
The second time there will be thirty-two billion free from attachment,
$434 “And the third time, thirty-one billion who have passed beyond exhaustion.
The lifespan of human beings will be twenty-five thousand years
And after this guide has attained nirvāṇa,
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
$435 “There will be eight hundred million stūpas the size of half a league,
All adorned with the seven precious substances.
The protector of the world, Jyeṣṭha,
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Merit.
$436 “The family of this victorious one will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend two leagues.
Excellent Moon will be his father and Gathered Flowers his mother.
Beauty will be his son and Glorious his attendant.
$437 “Trained Mind will be the one of insight
And Infinite Glory the one of miracles.
In the first congregation eighty thousand powerful ones will be gathered;
In the second there will be ninety thousand;
$438 “And in the third there will be one billion stainless ones.
His lifespan will be twenty million years
And the sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred million years.
There will be a single stūpa, measuring thirty krośas.
$439 “It will be abundantly adorned with the seven precious substances
And seventy-two billion parasols.
The thus-gone Abhyudgataśrī will be born
In a place called Endowed with Wisdom.
$440 “The family of this well-gone one will be brahmin
And his light will extend ten krośas.
Excellent Friend will be his father and Stūpa for Humanity his mother.
Supreme will be his son and Excellent Eye his attendant.
$441 “Roaring like a Lion will be the one of insight
And Highest the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be one hundred million worthy ones,
In the second there will be one hundred twenty million, and in the third there will be eighty million.
$442 “The lifespan of humans at that time
Will be twenty-four thousand years.
After the victorious one has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
$443 “His relics will increase and there will be nine billion stūpas,
Each measuring seven krośas and adorned with jewel parasols.
The thus-gone Siṃhaghoṣa will be born [133.a]
In a place called Lord of Śāla Trees.
$444 “The family of this well-gone one will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine krośas.
Beautiful Body will be his father and Accomplished Speech his mother.
Free from Disease will be his son and Crest his attendant.
$445 “Insight Free from Doubt will be the scholar
And Dharma Joy the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be sixty thousand
Worthy ones who are free from pride and arrogance.
$446 “In the second will be seventy thousand, and in the third there will be eighty thousand.
The span of his life will be long: ten thousand years.
After this immaculate one has attained nirvāṇa,
The sacred Dharma will remain for a thousand years.
$447 “At that time there will be a single stūpa of this well-gone one,
Measuring seven leagues and studded with jewels throughout.
The well-gone Vikrīḍitāvin will be born
In a place called Glorious Merit.
$448 “The family of this well-gone one will be brahmin
And his light will extend three krośas.
Excellent Splendor will be his father and Roar of Merit his mother.
Loved by the Gods will be his son and Peace his attendant.
$449 “Superior Dharma will be the scholar
And Supreme Teacher the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be eighty thousand
Who have completely vanquished the dirt of desire.
$450 “In the second congregation will be seventy-eight thousand,
And in the third there will be seventy-six thousand who have given up dullness.
The lifespan of humans at that time
Will be seventy-four thousand years,
$451 “And the sacred Dharma will remain twice as long.
There will be a single stūpa of this great sage.
The thus-gone Nāgaprabhāsa will be born
In a place called Seen by Elephants.
$452 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Land of Excellence will be his father and Intense Joy his mother.
Benefactor will be his son and Mountain his attendant.
$453 “Causal Strength will be the scholar
And Given by the Sages the one of miracles.
Seven hundred twenty billion victorious worthy ones
Will gather in the first assembly.
$454 “In the second congregation will be seven hundred ten billion, [133.b]
And in the third there will be seven hundred billion.
At that time the duration of life
Will be eight hundred years.
$455 “The sacred Dharma will remain twelve hundred years
And there will be a single stūpa of this victorious one.
The thus-gone Kusumaparvata will be born
In a place called Seen by Mountains.
$456 “His family will be brahmin,
And the circle of his light will extend thirty leagues.
Fine and Noble Mind will be his father and Qualities Accumulated his mother.
Strength of Bliss will be his son and Fierce his attendant.
$457 “Radiance of Perfect Wisdom will be the scholar
And Supreme Lightning the one of miracles.
The gathering of worthy ones will number sixty-six thousand.
In the second congregation will be sixty-five thousand immaculate ones,
$458 “And in the third there will be sixty-four thousand.
His lifespan will be eighty thousand years.
After this well-gone one has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain thirty million years.
$459 There will be one hundred thousand stūpas of this victorious one,
Exquisitely decorated with supreme pearl nets.
The thus-gone Nāganandin will be born
In a place called Flower Light.
$460 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will shine across sixty-seven leagues.
Deer Gait will be his father
And Fine Form his mother.
$461 “Nāga will be his son
And Continent Traveler his attendant.
Splendor of the World will be the scholar
And Great Joy the one of miracles.
$462 “In the first congregation there will be ten billion,
In the second there will be eighty million, and in the third there will be fifty million.
His lifespan will be thirty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
$463 “There will be eighty thousand stūpas of this victorious one,
Adorned with banners that reach a league high.
The thus-gone Gandheśvara will be born
In a place called Seen with Delight.
$464 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty leagues.
Excellent Birth will be his father, Moonlight his mother, and Jambu Movement his son. [134.a]
Excellent Leader will be his attendant.
$465 “Light of Insight will be the scholar
And Glorious Pride the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be ninety billion worthy ones,
In the second there will be eighty billion, and in the third there will be seventy-six billion.
$466 “At that time the lifespan of humans
Will be eighty-four thousand years,
And his sacred Dharma
Will remain for one million years.
$467 “There will be seven hundred ten billion stūpas,
Beautifully adorned with the purest and finest gold.
The well-gone one Atiyaśas will be born
In a place called Pure Delight.
$468 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend five leagues.
Master of the Gathering will be his father and Possessor of Gold will be his mother.
Fortunate Wish will be his son and Sun will be his attendant.
$469 “Dharma Light will be the scholar
And Realizing the Heard will be the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be
Four hundred sixty billion worthy ones,
$470 In the second there will be four hundred thirty billion,
And in the third there will be two hundred thirty billion.
His lifespan will be two thousand years,
And after the teacher has attained nirvāṇa
$471 “The sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
There will be a single relic and single stūpa, measuring five leagues.
The thus-gone Baladeva will be born
In a place called Great Light.
$472 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Exquisite Excellence will be his father and Moonlight his mother.
Capable Light will be his son and Joyous will be his attendant.
$473 “Lion Intelligence will be the scholar
And Friend of Existence will be the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be
Nine hundred thirty billion who have conquered matter;
$474 “In the second there will be nine hundred twenty billion;
And in the third there will be nine hundred ten billion.
His lifespan will be nine thousand years
And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
$475 “His relics will be abundant, [134.b]
And there will be eight hundred billion stūpas.
The incomparable Guṇamālin will be born
In a place called Delightful Joy.
$476 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-six leagues.
Excellent Youth will be his father and Fortunate Roar his mother.
The son of this victor will be called Brahmā Master
$477 “And Perfect Wisdom will be his attendant.
Excellent Hand will be the scholar and Excellent Countenance the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be ten billion worthy ones;
In the second there will be the same amount;
$478 And in the third there will be five times more.
His lifespan will be eighty thousand years,
And after this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years.
$479 “There will be nine hundred ninety million stūpas,
All of them covered in pure gold.
The well-gone one Nāgabhuja will be born
At a place called Joy.
$480 “The family of this protector will be brahmin
And his light will constantly illumine
Seventy-two thousand islands.
Accumulating Light will be his father
$481 “And Fragrant his mother.
Gentle will be his son and Radiant his attendant.
Wisdom View will be the scholar
And Truth Speaker the one of miracles.
$482 “In the first congregation there will be one hundred sixty million,
In the second there will be one hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be two hundred million.
His lifespan will be ten thousand years.
After this well-gone one has transcended suffering,
$483 “His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty million years
And there will be nine hundred ninety million stūpas.
The well-gone one Pratimaṇḍita­locana will be born
In a place called Supreme Stūpa.
$484 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seven leagues.
Excellent Companion will be his father and Nets of Light his mother.
Joyous Force will be his son and Liberated his attendant.
$485 “Dharma Perception will be the scholar
And Equipoise the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be one trillion worthy ones.
In the second will gather [135.a]
$486 “Nine hundred billion worthy ones, and in the third there will be eight hundred billion.
His lifespan will be twenty-six thousand years,
And after this buddha has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
$487 “There will be ten million fine stūpas,
Adorned with nets of hundreds of jewels.
The buddha Sucīṛnabuddhi will be born
In a place called Endowed with Ten.
$488 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend two leagues.
Great Mastery will be his father and Crest Light his mother.
Leader of Humanity will be his son and Ornament his attendant.
$489 “King of Medicine will be the scholar
And Word Leader the one of miracles.
Twenty-two thousand worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation there will be thirty thousand,
$490 “And in the third there will be twenty-eight thousand.
His lifespan will be one thousand years,
And after this buddha has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain practiced for fourteen thousand years.
$491 “There will be a single relic of this incomparable being,
Contained in a stūpa measuring an entire league.
The buddha Jñānābhibhū will be born
In a place called Wish for Joy.
$492 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend two leagues.
Powerful will be his father and True Yogic Discipline his mother.
Delightful Sage will be his son and Joyous his attendant.
$493 “Dharma Display will be the scholar
And Moonlight the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be one hundred thirty million,
In the second there will be one hundred twenty million, and in third, eighty million.
$494 “His lifespan will be two hundred years
And his sacred Dharma will remain for ten billion years.
His relics will be abundant,
And there will be thirty-two billion stūpas,
$495 “Each of them measuring two leagues
And adorned with eighty thousand parasols.
The buddha Amitalocana will be born
In a place called Luminous Merit.
$496 “The family of this victor will be brahmin, [135.b]
And his light will extend four leagues.
Knowledge of Yogic Discipline will be his father and Dharma Adherence his mother.
Delighting in Victory will be his son and Essence his attendant.
$497 “Flower Gathering will be the scholar
And Elephant Gait the one of miracles.
Sixty-six billion worthy ones will gather.
In the second gathering will be sixty-five billion, and in the third there will be sixty-seven billion.
$498 “The lifespan of this compassionate one
Will be twenty-three thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this destroyer of the māras
Will remain for ten thousand years.
$499 “There will be one hundred million stūpas,
Adorned with flowers and archways.
The thus-gone Satyabhāṇin will be born
In a place called Endowed with Brightness.
$500 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Excellent Merit will be his father and Divine Light his mother.
Great Objective will be his son and Luminous his attendant.
$501 “Superior True Wisdom will be the scholar
And Moving in Existence the one of miracles.
Twenty billion worthy ones will gather.
In the second gathering will be one billion,
$502 “And in the third there will be nine hundred million.
His lifespan will be eighty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this being of peace
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
$503 “There will be six hundred million holy stūpas,
Studded with golden banners.
The thus-gone Sūryaprabha will be born
In a place called Medicine.
$504 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend three leagues.
Excellent Eye will be his father and Endowed with Discipline his mother.
Liberation Joy will be his son and Peace his attendant.
$505 “Precious Fame will be the scholar
And Unsullied the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be three hundred million,
In the second there will be two hundred ten million,
$506 “And in the third there will be three hundred million.
His lifespan will be six million years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain [136.a]
For one million three hundred thousand years.
$507 “There will be nine billion stūpas,
Studded with golden banners.
The thus-gone Niyatabuddhi will be born
In a place called Delightful Joy.
$508 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Distinguished will be his father and Blissful his mother.
Whole will be his son and Star his attendant.
$509 “Special Knowledge will be the scholar
And Abandoning the Māras the one of miracles.
In the first great congregation will be one billion.
In the second there will be eight hundred million, and in the third there will be six hundred million.
$510 “The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years
And the sacred Dharma will remain five times as long.
His relics will be abundant in Jambudvīpa
And there will be eighty-eight billion stūpas.
$511 “One billion butter lamps will burn
At each stūpa, throughout day and night.
The thus-gone Anantarūpa will be born
In a place called Worship.
$512 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
Excellent Companion will be his father and Endowed with Excellence his mother.
Fearless will be his son and Luminous his attendant.
$513 “Indubitable Secret Mantra will be the scholar
And Light of Bliss the one of miracles.
Five hundred sixty million extremely joyous worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be five hundred fifty million,
$514 “And in the third there will be five hundred forty million.
The lifespan of humans will be ten million years,
And after the well-gone has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain ten million years.
$515 “There will be thirty-two billion stūpas,
Adorned with jewel lotuses.
The well-gone Vairocana will be born
In a place called Perfect Flowers.
$516 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend five leagues.
Excellent Youth will be his father and Supreme Gaṅgā his mother.
Light Limit will be his son and Full his attendant.
$517 “Dispeller of Dullness will be the scholar
And Relinquisher of Defilements the one of miracles. [136.b]
In the first congregation there will be six hundred million
Worthy ones who have transcended existence.
$518 “In the second will be seven hundred million, and in the third there will be eight hundred million.
His lifespan will be ten million years,
And after this incomparable being has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years.
$519 “There will be a single stūpa of his,
Measuring three and a half leagues and studded with jewels.
The thus-gone Ratnaketu will be born
At a place called Joy.
$520 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Subjugator will be his father and Universal Joy his mother.
Excellent Fame will be his son and Stainless his attendant.
$521 “Sky Mind will be the scholar
And Mountain Light the one of miracles.
Nine hundred forty million worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be nine hundred thirty million,
$522 “And in the third there will be nine hundred twenty million.
His lifespan will be ninety thousand years,
And after this recipient of the worship of the three worlds has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
$523 “There will be abundant relics
And nine hundred twenty million stūpas.
The protector Vigatakāṅkṣa will be born
In a place called Auspicious.
$524 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Free from Suffering will be his father and Excellent Intelligence his mother.
Unsullied will be his son and Knowledgeable his attendant.
$525 “Force of Certainty will be the scholar
And Joyous Miracles the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be ninety million,
In the second there will be eighty million, and in the third there will be seventy million.
$526 “At that time the lifespan of this victor
Will be three hundred years,
And after the victorious one has gone to cessation
The sacred Dharma will remain for two thousand years.
$527 “There will be single stūpa,
Made of the seven precious substances and one league tall.
The well-gone one Lokottīrṇa will be born
In a place called Constant Joy.
$528 “His family will be brahmin, [137.a]
And his light will extend six leagues.
Moon of Existence will be his father and Brahmā Light his mother.
Brahmā Excellence will be his son and Braided his attendant.
$529 “Sunlight will be the scholar
And No Contact the one of miracles.
One hundred forty million worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be three hundred million endowed with wisdom,
$530 “And in the third congregation will be two hundred million.
His lifespan will be ten million years,
And after this illuminator of the world has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years.
$531 “The jewel-studded stūpas dedicated to nirvāṇa
Will number eight hundred million.
The buddha Amoghavikramin will be born
In a place called Endowed with Clouds.
$532 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seven leagues.
Master of Sages will be his father and Brahmā Melody his mother.
Light of Bliss will be his son and Steadfast his attendant.
$533 “Land of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Delightful Roar the one of miracles.
Nine hundred ninety million worthy ones without ‘I’ will gather.
In the second gathering will be nine hundred eighty million,
$534 “And in the third there will be nine hundred sixty million.
At that time the lifespan will be ninety-five thousand years,
And after this well-gone one has transcended suffering
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
$535 “His relics will be abundant,
And there will be thirty-two billion stūpas.
The well-gone Vibodhana will be born
In a place called Clouds of Joy.
$536 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty leagues.
Great Mastery will be his father and Precious Joy his mother.
Delighting People will be his son and Capable his attendant.
$537 “Dharma Strength will be the scholar
And Scholar Endowed with Insight the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be nine billion
Worthy ones who relinquish doubt.
$538 “In the second will be eight billion and in the third there will be seven billion.
His lifespan will be eighty thousand years,
And after this well-gone one has perfected exhaustion
The sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years. [137.b]
$539 “His relics will remain a single unit and there will be a single stūpa,
Measuring three leagues and adorned with golden banners.
The well-gone Puṣpaketu will be born
In a place called Supreme.
$540 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend five leagues.
Conscientious will be his father and Jambu River his mother.
Stability will be his son and Joy his attendant.
$541 “Light of the World will be the scholar
And Endowed with Wisdom the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million.
In the second will be eight hundred million with liberated minds,
$542 “And in the third there will be nine hundred million.
His lifespan will be ninety-nine thousand years,
And after his nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred million years.
$543 “His fine stūpas containing relics
Will number three hundred twenty million.
The thus-gone Śailendrarāja will be born
In a place called Seen with Delight.
$544 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend sixteen leagues.
Excellent Yogic Discipline will be his father and Delighting in Generosity his mother.
Campaka will be his son and Master of Light his attendant.
$545 “Language of Insight will be the scholar
And Delightful Moon the one of miracles.
Eighty thousand worthy ones will gather.
The second congregation will have seventy thousand and the third sixty thousand.
$546 “The lifespan of humans will be ten million years,
And after this well-gone one has transcended suffering
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
$547 “He will have a single stūpa of relics,
Reaching one league high and studded with jewels.
The thus-gone Mahātejas will be born
In a place called Seen Always.
$548 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend two leagues.
Excellent Steps will be his father and Sound of Thunder his mother. [138.a]
Gentle Joy will be his son and Luminous his attendant.
$549 “Superior Shooting Star will be the scholar
And Heroic Fame the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-two thousand worthy ones without ‘I.’
In the second congregation will be thirty-one thousand
$550 And in the third there will be thirty thousand.
At that time the span of life will be sixty thousand years,
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for eighty thousand years.
$551 “His relics will be abundant,
And there will be seven hundred sixty billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Kṛtārthadarśin will be born
In a place called Utpala Petals.
$552 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eight hundred million leagues.
Fearless will be his father and Glorious Splendor his mother.
Proclaimer will be his son and Endowed with Dharma his attendant.
$553 “Excellent Light will be the scholar
And Supreme Intelligence the one of miracles.
Four hundred thirty million worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be four hundred twenty million,
$554 “And in the third there will be four hundred ten million.
His lifespan will be forty-six thousand years,
And after he has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for eighty-six thousand years.
$555 “His relics will remain in a single collection in a single stūpa
Shielded by eighty thousand parasols.
The thus-gone Amitayaśas will be born
In a place called Certain Lotus.
$556 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Free from Deception will be his father and Blissful Mind his mother.
Joyous Fame will be his son and Nāga his attendant.
$557 “Mind without Doubt will be the scholar
And Joyous Roar the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million worthy ones,
In the second there will be six hundred million,
$558 “And in the third there will be five hundred million.
His lifespan will be six hundred thousand years,
And when this well-gone one has reached exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years. [138.b]
$559 “His abundant relics will be contained in seven hundred million stūpas
Adorned with parasols and banners.
The thus-gone Ratnadeva will be born
In a place called Adorned with Utpalas.
$560 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend two leagues.
Hero will be his father and Śāla Light his mother.
Excellent Joy will be his son and Conqueror his attendant.
$561 “Starlight will be the scholar
And Golden Light the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be eight hundred million,
In the second there will be five hundred million, and in the third, three hundred million.
$562 “The lifespan of human beings at that time
Will be twenty-two thousand years,
And when this thus-gone one has gone to cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$563 “The stūpa will measure two leagues
And be surrounded by a one billion parasols.
The thus-gone Sthitārtha­jñānin will be born
In a place called Adorned.
$564 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twelve leagues.
Meaningful Adherence will be his father and Moon Possessor his mother.
Delightful Moon will be his son and Joy his attendant.
$565 “Vast Glory will be the scholar
And Essence of Yogic Discipline the one of miracles.
There will be two hundred twenty million worthy ones.
In the second congregation will be two hundred ten million,
$566 “And in the third there will be two hundred million.
The lifespan of human beings will be ten million years,
And the sacred Dharma of this immaculate one
Will remain for ninety-nine thousand years.
$567 “His stūpa will measure four leagues
And be beautifully adorned with ten million parasols.
The thus-gone Pūrṇamati will be born
In a place called Light of Merit.
$568 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend six leagues.
Excellent Mind will be his father and Lotus Possessor his mother.
Joyous Listening will be his son and Crystal his attendant.
$569 “Superior Merit will be the scholar
And Moon Strength the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be eight hundred million. [139.a]
In the second congregation will be seven hundred million fearless ones,
$570 “And in the third there will be ten billion.
His lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this knower of the world
Will remain for two hundred thirty million years.
$571 “There will be sixty-four billion immaculate stūpas,
Each measuring three krośas.
The thus-gone Aśoka will be born
In a place called Superior Brightness.
$572 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend fourteen leagues.
Moon Mountain will be his father and Excellent Mind his mother.
Beautiful Mind will be his son and Qualities his attendant.
$573 “Dharma Perception will be the scholar
And Lion Strength the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be thirty thousand,
In the second will be twenty-eight thousand,
$574 “His lifespan will be one thousand years,
And when this well-gone one has transcended suffering
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
There will be various stūpas measuring a league,
$575 “Which will be made by the seven precious substances.
The thus-gone Vigatamala will be born
In a place called Adorned with Jewels.
His family will be brahmin,
$576 “And his light will extend three leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father and Perfectly Serene his mother.
Delightful Moon will be his son and Endowed with Qualities his attendant.
Striding Elephant will be the scholar
$577 “And Truth Speaker the one of miracles.
Five billion worthy ones will gather.
In the second gathering will be two billion,
And in the third there will be three billion.
$578 “His lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years,
And when this supreme human one has transcended suffering
His sacred Dharma will remain for ten billion years.
There will be single stūpa measuring a league
$579 “And adorned with ten thousand supreme parasols.
The thus-gone Brahmadeva will be born
In a place called Adorned with Merit.
His family will be kṣatriya, [139.b]
$580 “And his light will extend thirty leagues.
Fine and Noble Mind will be his father and Flower Light his mother.
Qualities Accumulated will be his son and Loving his attendant.
Divine Horse Master will be the scholar
$581 “And Rāhu Holder the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be five hundred thousand
Worthy ones who have exhausted existence.
In the second there will be six million and in the third, seven million seven hundred thousand.
$582 “His lifespan will be one thousand years,
And once this true victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years.
His relics will remain in a single collection
$583 “Contained in a stūpa three leagues tall.
The thus-gone Dharaṇīśvara will be born
In a place called Splendid.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$584 “And his light will extend sixty leagues.
Excellent Form will be his father and Dharma Light his mother.
Blissful Joy will be his son and Virtue his attendant.
Dispeller of Dullness will be the scholar
$585 “And Victorious Joy the one of miracles.
Sixty-four thousand worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be sixty-five thousand,
And in the third there will be sixty thousand.
$586 “His lifespan will be ten million years,
And the Dharma of this incomparable well-gone one
Will remain for thirty million years.
His relics will be abundant,
$587 “And there will be sixty-two billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Kusumanetra will be born
In a place called Mental Connection.
His family will be brahmin,
$588 “And his light will extend sixty-two leagues.
Ruler of Men will be his father and Intelligent Mind his mother.
Joyous World will be his son and Flower his attendant.
Dispeller of Pain will be the scholar
$589 “And Holder of the World the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be sixty thousand,
The second will have seventy thousand, and the third, eighty thousand.
At that time the lifespan of the victorious one
$590 “Will be ninety thousand years,
And the Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for twenty million years. [140.a]
There will be one hundred million stūpas
$591 “Decorated with gold and studded with jewels.
The thus-gone Vibhaktagātra will be born
In a place called Various Jewels.
His family will be brahmin,
$592 “And his light will extend half a league.
Renowned Ruler will be his father and Illuminator his mother.
Superior will be his son and Steps his attendant.
Vast Generosity will be the scholar
$593 “And Lion’s Roar the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be
One hundred billion worthy sages.
In the second will be eighty billion, and in the third there will be seventy billion.
$594 “His lifespan will be ten million years,
And once this buddha has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for fifty million years.
The relics of nirvāṇa will remain in a single collection
$595 “And there will be one stūpa, measuring seven leagues.
The well-gone one Dharmaprabhāsa will be born
In a place called Bright Sight.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$596 “And his light will extend five leagues.
Distinguished will be his father and Great Jewel his mother.
Superior will be his son and Conscientious his attendant.
Lion Voice will be the scholar
$597 “And Gentle Light the one of miracles.
In the first congregation there will be nine hundred million,
In the second there will be eight hundred, and in the third there will be six hundred.
The lifespan of humans
$598 “Will be seventy-four thousand years,
And when he has gone beyond entities
His sacred Dharma will remain for two hundred million years.
The number of stūpas and relics of this victorious one
$599 “Will number nine hundred forty billion.
The thus-gone Nikhiladarśin will be born
In a place called Looking at the World.
His family will be brahmin,
$600 “And his light will extend three leagues.
Excellent Hand will be his father and Lion Intelligence his mother.
Luminous Qualities will be his son and Suffering his attendant.
Dispeller of Suffering will be the scholar [140.b]
$601 “And Great Fame the one of miracles.
Seven hundred forty million worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be seven hundred fifty million,
And in the third there will be seven hundred sixty million.
$602 “The lifespan of humans will be seven hundred million years,
And when this immaculate one has reached exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety million years.
There will be three billion stūpas
$603 “Decorated with gold and studded with jewels.
The well-gone one Guṇaprabhāsa will be born
In a place called Seeing Awakening.
His family will be kṣatriya,
$604 “And his light will extend ten million leagues.
Enemy Subjugator will be his father and Endowed with Fierce Yogic Discipline his mother.
Blissful Joy will be his son and Joyous his attendant.
Attentive View will be the scholar
$605 “And Great Radiance the one of miracles.
One billion worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be nine hundred sixty million
And in the third congregation, eight hundred million.
$606 “His lifespan in the world will be one thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who has reached exhaustion
Will remain for ninety-six thousand years.
There will be five hundred million extraordinary stūpas,
$607 “Studded with various types of precious jewels.
The thus-gone Śaśivaktra will be born
In a place called Merit Accumulated.
His family will be kṣatriya,
$608 “And his light will extend thirty million leagues.
Ocean will be his father and Endowed with Flowers his mother.
Joyous Accumulation will be his son and Bent his attendant.
Lion Sight will be the scholar
$609 “And Intense Joy the one of miracles.
Eight hundred billion worthy ones will gather.
In the second congregation will be seven hundred billion and in the third there will be three hundred billion.
The lifespan of humans
$610 “Will be forty-six thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who has reached exhaustion
Will remain complete for ten thousand years.
There will be nine hundred ninety billion jewel-studded stūpas.
$611 “The thus-gone Ratnaprabha will be born in a place called Jewel Crest. [141.a] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Fortunate Wish will be his father. Divine Fame will be his mother. Delightful Speech will be his son. Joyous Movement will be his attendant. Leader of the Gathering will be foremost in terms of insight. Hard to Tame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather nine hundred million hearers; in the second there will be one hundred and twenty million, and in the third there will be one hundred fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$612  “The thus-gone Ratnaketu will be born in a place called Manifold Pile. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred thousand leagues. Ocean Mind will be his father. Perfect Mind will be his mother. Joy for the World will be his son. Possessor of the Roar will be his attendant. Lamp of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Splendid Glory will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. The extent of his lifespan will be one trillion years. In the first congregation will gather six hundred million hearers; in the second there will be eight hundred; and in the third there will be one billion. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant. There will be one hundred thousand stūpas.
$613  “The thus-gone Yaśottara will be born in a place called Supreme Flower. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty leagues. Highest will be his father. Supreme Endowment will be his mother. Splendid Beauty will be his son. Superior Qualities will be his attendant. Truth will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Movement will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather one billion hearers; in the second there will be fifty million, [141.b] and in the third there will be ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$614 “The thus-gone Prabhākara will be born in a place called Adorned. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten thousand leagues. Crest Banner will be his father. Stainless Light will be his mother. Giver of Lightning will be his son. Joyous Worthy One will be his attendant. Discerning Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather seven hundred million hearers; in the second there will be eight hundred million, and in the third there will be nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$615 “The thus-gone Amitatejas will be born in a place called To Be Seen. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one million two hundred thousand leagues. Blissful Homage will be his father. Gift of Excellence will be his mother. Gift of Discipline will be his son. Equanimous Mind will be his attendant. Fearless will be foremost in terms of insight. Free from Fear will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather nine hundred million hearers; in the second there will be nine hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be nine hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$616 “The thus-gone Velāma will be born in a place called Joyous Star. His family will be brahmin. His light will cover Jambudvīpa. Supreme Treasure will be his father. Excellent Intelligence will be his mother. [142.a]Gift of Excellence will be his son. Carefree Movement will be his attendant. Moon Parasol will be foremost in terms of insight. Incomparable will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather eight hundred million hearers; in the second there will be eight hundred fifty million, and in the third there will be nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$617 “The thus-gone Siṃhagātra will be born in a place called Lovely Delight. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will cover the four continents. Divine Flower will be his father. Equaling the Unequaled will be his mother. Intelligent will be his son. Perfect Wisdom will be his attendant. Strength of Reflection will be foremost in terms of insight. Force of Discernment will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen successive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will likewise remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$618 “The thus-gone Vidumati will be born in a place called Supreme Accumulation. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Supreme Mind will be his father. Brahmā Supreme will be his mother. Accomplishment of Yogic Discipline will be his son. Wealth God will be his attendant. Joy for the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten successive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$619 “The thus-gone Durjaya will be born in a place called Radiant. His family will be kṣatriya. [142.b] His light will extend twenty leagues. Flower Gift will be his father. Flower Garland will be his mother. Crown Jewel will be his son. Holder of the Treasury will be his attendant. Distinguished will be foremost in terms of insight. Gentle will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather ten thousand hearers; in the second there will be thirty thousand, and in the third there will be fifty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$620 “The thus-gone Guṇaskandha will be born in a place called Constant View. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six million leagues. Excellent Weapon will be his father. Gift of Excellence will be his mother. Free from Suffering will be his son. Without Suffering will be his attendant. Excellent Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Unswerving Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty successive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred eighty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$621 “The thus-gone Śaśiketu will be born in a place called Supreme Excellence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one million five hundred thousand leagues. Exquisite Excellence will be his father. Sky Lady will be his mother. Endowed with Life Force will be his son. Intelligent will be his attendant. Seeing Eyes will be foremost in terms of insight. Powerful Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather sixty billion hearers; in the second there will be seventy billion; in the third, eighty billion; in the fourth, ninety billion; and in the fifth, one hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years. [143.a] There will be eighty-four thousand stūpas.
$622 “The thus-gone Sthāmaprāpta will be born in a place called Infinite Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Master of the Land will be his father. Excellent Eye will be his mother. Glorious Wisdom will be his son. Merit Wish will be his attendant. Source of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty successive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-one years. His relics will be abundant.
$623 “The thus-gone Anantavikrāmin will be born in a place called Dharma Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty leagues. Joyous Leader will be his father. Gift of Fame will be his mother. Excellent Weapon will be his son. Home Sweeper will be his attendant. Blazing Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Glorious Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather six hundred thousand hearers; in the second there will be five hundred thousand, and in the third there will be four hundred thousand. His lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-two thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$624 “The thus-gone Candra will be born in a place called Adorned with Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three hundred million leagues. Stainless Radiance will be his father. Splendid Hill will be his mother. Splendid Lamp will be his son. Gathering of Qualities will be his attendant. Unobscured Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Gift of the Supreme will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [143.b] There will be eighty successive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. His lifespan will be six hundred million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$625 “The thus-gone Vimala will be born in a place called Great Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend forty leagues. Land of Excellence will be his father. Dharma Intelligence will be his mother. Punarvasu will be his son. Worthy of Worship will be his attendant. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of insight. Precious Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather one billion hearers; in the second there will be nine hundred ninety million, and in the third there will be eight hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$626 “The thus-gone Sarvārtha­darśin will be born in a place called Splendid Hill. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twenty-five million leagues. Vajra Force will be his father. Ocean Gift will be his mother. Joyous Melody will be his son. Meaningful Joy will be his attendant. Defeater of Attacks will be foremost in terms of insight. Superior Fame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty successive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. His lifespan will be seventy-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$627 “The thus-gone Śūra will be born in a place called Impenetrable. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Light of Joy will be his father. Endowed with Merit will be his mother. Beauty will be his son. [144.a]Beautiful Melody will be his attendant. Delightful Attention will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Speech will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty successive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred forty million. His lifespan will be fifty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$628 “The thus-gone Samṛddha will be born in a place called Yielding as Wished. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend four thousand leagues. Śāla King will be his father. Thoroughly Joyous will be his mother. True Mind will be his son. Dharma Mind will be his attendant. Endowed with Dharma will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon Crest will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty successive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. His lifespan will be one billion years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty billion years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$629 “The thus-gone Puṇya will be born in a place called The People’s Offering. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ninety-four thousand leagues. Delightful to See will be his father. Delightful to Hear will be his mother. Joyous will be his son. Vast Joy will be his attendant. Wisdom Hand will be foremost in terms of insight. Dharma Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather seven hundred million hearers; in the second there will be six hundred fifty million; and in the third there will be six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$630 The thus-gone Pradīpa will be born in a place called Jewel Treasury. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine thousand eight hundred leagues. [144.b]Sandalwood will be his father. Endowed with Acumen will be his mother. Supreme Campaka will be his son. Honey Gift will be his attendant. Delightful Words will be foremost in terms of insight. Clear Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty successive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred seventy million. The extent of his lifespan will be nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$631 “The thus-gone Guṇārci will be born in a place called Meaningful Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Joyous Endeavor will be his father. Excellent Intelligence will be his mother. Jewel will be his son. Wealthy will be his attendant. Supreme Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Jewel will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen successive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred and sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nine million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$632 “The thus-gone Vipulabuddhi will be born in a place called Ocean. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Fine and Noble Mind will be his father. Abiding Mind will be his mother. Excellent Arising will be his son. Source of Qualities will be his attendant. Treasure Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nine successive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$633 “The thus-gone Sujāta will be born in a place called Joyful Merit. [145.a] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Brahmā Melody will be his father. Endowed with Dharma will be his mother. Star King will be his son. Illuminator will be his attendant. Joy for the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather one billion hearers; in the second there will be nine hundred eighty million, and in the third there will be nine hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$634 “The thus-gone Vasudeva will be born in a place called Flower. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty-two thousand leagues. Excellence will be his father. Swift Sharpness will be his mother. Moon will be his son. Honey Gift will be his attendant. Bright Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Equanimous Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen successive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$635 “The thus-gone Vimatijaha will be born in a place called Joyful Possession of Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten million leagues. Ribbon of Joy will be his father. Endowed with Excellence will be his mother. Flower Joy will be his son. Intelligent Adherence will be his attendant. Beautiful Movement will be foremost in terms of insight. Beautiful Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nine successive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nine thousand years. His relics will be abundant. [145.b]
$636 “The thus-gone Amitadhara will be born in a place called Seen Always. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-six leagues. Land of Excellence will be his father. Aspiring Mind will be his mother. Divine Joy will be his son. Great Eye will be his attendant. Joyous Expert will be foremost in terms of insight. Undaunted will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather ten million hearers; in the second there will be one billion, and in the third there will be one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty-five thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$637 “The thus-gone Vararuci will be born in a place called Blissful and Clear. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty-six leagues. Supreme Speech will be his father. Supreme Mind will be his mother. Radiant will be his son. Worship will be his attendant. Child of the Wealth God will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety successive congregations, each of them gathering thirty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-two thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$638 “The thus-gone Anihata will be born in a place called Hard to Tame. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five leagues. Bright Strength will be his father. Delightful Intelligence will be his mother. Utpala Fragrance will be his son. Luminous Qualities will be his attendant. Jewel Treasury will be foremost in terms of insight. Unwavering Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be three successive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-six thousand years. [146.a] His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$639 “The thus-gone Asthita will be born in a place called Supreme Victory. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twenty-eight leagues. Divine Sage will be his father. Stainless Intelligence will be his mother. Star King will be his son. Son of No Craving will be his attendant. Joyous will be foremost in terms of insight. Intense Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten successive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$640 “The thus-gone Tacchaya will be born in a place called Source of Jewels. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight leagues. Supreme Leader will be his father. Flower Possessor will be his mother. True Mind will be his son. Truly Superior will be his attendant. Qualities Assembled will be foremost in terms of insight. Nectar Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty successive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$641 “The thus-gone Gaṇimukha will be born in a place called Radiant Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend fifteen leagues. Flower Banner will be his father. Essence of Expertise will be his mother. Essential Meaning will be his son. Illuminator will be his attendant. Mind of the Infinite will be foremost in terms of insight. Destroyer of Attacks will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will only be a single congregation, gathering eight hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one day. His sacred Dharma will remain for four hundred and sixty million years. [146.b] His relics will be abundant.
$642 “The thus-gone Jagadraśmi will be born in a place called Infinite Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Infinite Light will be his father. Splendid Victor will be his mother. Luminous Qualities will be his son. Light of the Heard will be his attendant. Light of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Light of Diligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-one successive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be forty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for four hundred million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$643 “The thus-gone Prabhūta will be born in a place called Joyful Possession of Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighteen leagues. Supreme Victor will be his father. Supreme Campaka will be his mother. Supreme Mind will be his son. Undaunted Mind will be his attendant. Intelligent Endowment with Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Intelligent Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eight successive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering two million five hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$644 “The thus-gone Puṣya will be born in a place called Worship. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twenty-eight leagues. Star King will be his father. Medicine will be his mother. Infinite Splendor of Rāhu will be his son. Palace of Light Rays will be his attendant. Wisdom Accomplished will be foremost in terms of insight. Fearless will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be five successive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. [147.a] His lifespan will be one hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$645 “The thus-gone Anantatejas will be born in a place called Radiant. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm. Flower Banner will be his father. Weapon of the Capable will be his mother. Sun Rays will be his son. Moon Countenance will be his attendant. Stainless Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two successive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seven thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$646 “The thus-gone Arthamati will be born in a place called Splendid Wealth. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as the millionfold world. Endowed with Acumen will be his father. Adherence to Qualities will be his mother. Flower Joy will be his son. Gentle will be his attendant. Intelligence Free from Unevenness will be foremost in terms of insight. Unwavering Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather eight hundred thousand hearers; in the second there will be nine hundred thousand, and in the third there will be one million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for six hundred million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$647 “The thus-gone Vaidyarāja will be born in a place called Remote and Delightful. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-four leagues. Strength of the Capable will be his father. Sandalwood Fragrance will be his mother. Vajra Gift will be his son. Sustainer will be his attendant. [147.b]Great Eye will be foremost in terms of insight. Firm Courage will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten successive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$648 “The thus-gone Prahāṇakhila will be born in a place called Flawless. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Benevolent Mind will be his father. Endowed with Love will be his mother. Melody of Victory will be his son. Close Attention will be his attendant. Treasury of Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Lofty Mountain will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventeen successive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$649 “The thus-gone Nirjvara will be born in a place called Few Karmic Imprints. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Bright will be his father. Meritorious Intelligence will be his mother. Loving Mind will be his son. Equanimous Mind will be his attendant. Wisdom Without Doubt will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eleven successive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering thirty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-four thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$650 “The thus-gone Sudatta will be born in a place called Delightful. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend to the limits of this world of four continents. Excellent Sustainer will be his father. [148.a] Gentle Joy will be his mother. Delightful Words will be his son. Splendid Wealth will be his attendant. Light of Precious Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Light of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty successive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$651 “The thus-gone Yaśadatta will be born in a place called Wisdom Gift. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty-three leagues. Divine Excellence will be his father. Gift of Fame will be his mother. Active Intelligence will be his son. Stable Mind will be his attendant. Delightful Companion will be foremost in terms of insight. Benevolent Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-six successive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$652 “The thus-gone Kusumadatta will be born in a place called Light of Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three leagues. Flower Gift will be his father. Endowed with Acumen will be his mother. Precious God will be his son. Melody Gift will be his attendant. Delightful Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Glorious Melody will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eleven successive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His teachings will yield gatherings of irreversible beings. His relics will be abundant.
$653 “The thus-gone Puruṣadatta will be born in a place called Source of Merit. His family will be brahmin. [148.b] His light will extend ninety-nine leagues. Vajra Holder will be his father. Fortunate Light will be his mother. Given by the Sages will be his son. Delighting the Noble will be his attendant. Mind of Liberation will be foremost in terms of insight. Beneficial Movement will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be two successive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$654 “The thus-gone Vajrasena will be born in a place called Infinite Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight leagues. Stainless Gift will be his father. Shining will be his mother. Fame will be his son. Progress in Wisdom will be his attendant. Mind of Seeing will be foremost in terms of insight. Qualities of Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty successive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$655 “The thus-gone Mahādatta will be born in a place called Merit Fragrance. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will be immeasurable. Supreme Mind will be his father. Supreme Jasmine Flower will be his mother. Gift of Qualities will be his son. Rich Mind will be his attendant. Mind of Excellent Adherence will be foremost in terms of insight. Subjugator of the Māras will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty successive congregations, each of them gathering five billion irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His teachings will yield gatherings of the irreversible. His relics will be abundant. [149.a]
$656 “The thus-gone Śāntimati will be born in a place called Delightful Peace. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Dharma God will be his father. Meritorious Intelligence will be his mother. Diverse will be his son. Worthy of Worship will be his attendant. Precious Hand will be foremost in terms of insight. Free from Darkness will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen successive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$657 “The thus-gone Gandhahastin will be born in a place called Fragrant. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three leagues. Fragrance Master will be his father. Delightful Fragrance will be his mother. Fragrance Qualities will be his son. Radiant will be his attendant. Crossing the Swamp will be foremost in terms of insight. Gift of Reflection will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six successive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-five thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$658 “The thus-gone Nārāyaṇa will be born in a place called Stable Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend fifteen leagues. Hero will be his father. Excellent Weapon will be his mother. Powerful Strength will be his son. Untiring will be his attendant. Engendering the Strength of Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Defeater of Attacks will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. [149.b] There will also only be one stūpa.
$659 “The thus-gone Sūrata will be born in a place called Splendor of Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend nineteen leagues. Sourceless will be his father. Lady of Joy will be his mother. Delightful Gift will be his son. Beneficial Mind will be his attendant. Moon Crest Banner will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Diligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be three congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eleven thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$660 “The thus-gone Anihata will be born in a place called Indestructible Wheel. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Sun Parasol will be his father. Highest Dharma will be his mother. Beautiful Brightness will be his son. Dharma Treasury will be his attendant. Mindfulness Companion will be foremost in terms of insight. Divine Clarity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$661 “The thus-gone Candrārka will be born in a place called Jewel Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six leagues. Moon will be his father. Jewel Splendor will be his mother. Moon Gift will be his son. Gentle Melody will be his attendant. Abiding Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Light of Pure Discipline will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. [150.a] His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$662 “The thus-gone Vidyutketu will be born in a place called Constant Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Crest of Masters will be his father. Light of the Child of the Wealth God will be his mother. Sun Lamp will be his son. Intelligence and Proper Attention will be his attendant. Leader of the Gathering will be foremost in terms of insight. Delightful Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$663 “The thus-gone Mahita will be born in a place called Delightful to Behold. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three and half leagues. Land of Excellence will be his father. Radiance of Wisdom will be his mother. Merit Wish will be his son. Mind of Liberation will be his attendant. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of insight. Joyous World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$664 “The thus-gone Śrīgupta will be born in a place called Moon Crest. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will cover ten worlds of four continents. Excellent Mind will be his father. Jewel Mind will be his mother. Power of the Dharma will be his son. Wisdom Melody will be his attendant. Nonabiding Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Truly Superior Yogic Discipline will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, [150.b] each of them gathering thirty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy million years. His relics will be abundant.
$665 “The thus-gone Jñānasūrya will be born in a place called Infinite Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will cover thirty-two world systems. Excellence will be his father. Supreme Excellence will be his mother. Sun Face will be his son. Excellent Yogic Discipline will be his attendant. Infinite Teacher will be foremost in terms of insight. Endowed with Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be eight hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years. His teachings will yield gatherings of the irreversible. His relics will be abundant.
$666 “The thus-gone Siddhārtha will be born in a place called Fulfilment of Wishes. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twelve thousand leagues. Gautama will be his father. Delightful Roar will be his mother. Moon Gift will be his son. Gift of the Firm will be his attendant. Supreme Essence will be foremost in terms of insight. Joyous Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventeen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$667 “The thus-gone Merukūṭa will be born in a place called Jewel Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten million leagues. Abiding Intelligence will be his father. Equanimous Mind will be his mother. Luminous Mind will be his son. Dharma Master will be his attendant. Light of the Gathering will be foremost in terms of insight. [151.a] Dharma Miracle will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$668 “The thus-gone Aridama will be born in a place called Freedom from Fear. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend as far as sixty worlds of four continents. Indomitable Fame will be his father. Famed Intelligence will be his mother. Beautiful Intelligence will be his son. Delightful Melody will be his attendant. Campaka Glory will be foremost in terms of insight. Great Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred forty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$669 “The thus-gone Padma will be born in a place called White Lotus. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend as far as eighteen worlds of four continents. Flower will be his father. Utpala Garland will be his mother. Flower Mountain will be his son. Ocean of Qualities will be his attendant. Beautiful in All Regards will be foremost in terms of insight. Stūpa for Humanity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering nine hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$670 “The thus-gone, the worthy one, Arthakīrti will be born in a place called Sage Faith. [151.b] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety leagues. Brahmā Wish will be his father. Truth Gift will be his mother. Joy Holder will be his son. Joyous Beauty will be his attendant. Unwavering Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Lofty Mountain will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering fourteen billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$671 “The thus-gone Jñānakrama will be born in a place called Glorious Acumen. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one fathom. Wealth of Yogic Discipline will be his father. Endowed with the Qualities of Reflection will be his mother. Mind of Liberation will be his son. Meaningful Mind will be his attendant. Light of Leadership will be foremost in terms of insight. Dispeller of Attacks will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$672 “The thus-gone Apagatakleśa will be born in a place called Smooth. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Excellent Friend will be his father. Drunk on Wine will be his mother. Lotus Essence will be his son. Clear Mindfulness will be his attendant. Unimpeded Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Banner of Training will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather one trillion worthy ones; in the second there will be one hundred million, and in the third there will be three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years. [152.a] His relics will be abundant.
$673 “The thus-gone Nala will be born in a place called Playful. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty-eight leagues. Source of Jewels will be his father. Endowed with Śāla Trees will be his mother. True Friend will be his son. Excellent Crest will be his attendant. Heap of Merit will be foremost in terms of insight. Rich Treasury will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be three consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering eighty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nine thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$674 “The thus-gone Sugandha will be born in a place called Limitless Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as Jambudvīpa. Wisdom Banner will be his father. Sage Joy will be his mother. Sage Gift will be his son. Famed Qualities will be his attendant. Active Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Earth Holding King will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seven hundred million years. His relics will be abundant.
$675 “The thus-gone Anupamarāṣṭra will be born in a place called Well-Protected Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend as far as this world of four continents. Fortunate Wish will be his father. Possessor of Jewels will be his mother. Beryl Essence will be his son. Ocean of Fame will be his attendant. Infinite Hand will be foremost in terms of insight. Complete Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [152.b] There will be thirty-eight consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$676 “The thus-gone Marudyaśas will be born in a place called Divine Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will be as profuse as the sands contained in this world of four continents. Land of Excellence will be his father. Child of the Wealth God will be his mother. Illuminator will be his son. Excellent Mind will be his attendant. Dharma Mountain will be foremost in terms of insight. Flowering Tree will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$677 “The thus-gone Bhavāntadarśin will be born in a place called Seen with Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty leagues. Free from Suffering will be his father. Gift of Joy will be his mother. Lofty Mountain will be his son. Gift of Marks will be his attendant. Great Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Delightful Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$678 “The thus-gone Candra will be born in a place called Studded. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty leagues. Moon Crest will be his father. Sun Essence will be his mother. Splendid Light will be his son. Delightful Melody will be his attendant. Unobscured Perception will be foremost in terms of insight. [153.a]Unrelenting Diligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-two thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$679 “The thus-gone Rāhu will be born in a place called Blazing Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Flashing Light will be his father. Delightful Light will be his mother. Stable Power will be his son. Mind of Power will be his attendant. Unimpeded will be foremost in terms of insight. Fierce Blazing will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be eight billion worthy ones, in the second there will be six billion, and in the third there will be four billion. His lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-five thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$680 “The thus-gone Ratnacandra will be born in a place called Supreme Jewel. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six hundred leagues. Exquisite Excellence will be his father. Great Array will be his mother. Luminous Joy will be his son. Flawed Face will be his attendant. Joyous Practice will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Mode will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-five consecutive congregations, each of them gathering fifteen billion. The extent of his lifespan will be five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$681 “The thus-gone Siṃhadhvaja will be born in a place called Studded. His family will be brahmin. [153.b] His light will extend sixty leagues. Superknowledge Gift will be his father. Delightful Mind will be his mother. Indomitable will be his son. Benevolent Mind will be his attendant. Harmonious Conduct will be foremost in terms of insight. Ever Present will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$682 “The thus-gone Dhyānarata will be born in a place called Delightful Peace. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six hundred leagues. Place of Winds will be his father. Nonabiding Mind will be his mother. Jewel of Peace will be his son. Dharma Joy will be his attendant. Pure Conduct will be foremost in terms of insight. Faith in Merit will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-three thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$683 “The thus-gone Anupama will be born in a place called Infinite Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand leagues. Unconquerable will be his father. Equal Wisdom will be his mother. Peaceful Intelligence will be his son. Lovely to See will be his attendant. Bearer of Meteors will be foremost in terms of insight. Wish for Insight will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eleven consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$684 “The thus-gone Vikrīḍita will be born in a place called Immeasurable Array. His family will be kṣatriya. [154.a] His light will extend three hundred leagues. Divine Joy will be his father. Jewel Splendor will be his mother. Eye Adornment will be his son. Joyous Sight will be his attendant. Unimpeded Seeing will be foremost in terms of insight. Delightful Movement will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-three consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be one billion years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred forty million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$685 “The thus-gone Guṇaratna will be born in a place called Infinite Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty leagues. Crest of Qualities will be his father. Crest of Merit will be his mother. Gift of Marks will be his son. Great Discerner will be his attendant. Authentic Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Wealth of Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$686 “The thus-gone Arhadyaśas will be born in a place called Wondrous. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Hidden by Nāgas will be his father. Endowed with Flowers will be his mother. Flower of Superknowledge will be his son. Well-Considered Aims will be his attendant. Beautiful Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Source of Insight will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eight hundred years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. [154.b] His relics will be abundant.
$687 “The thus-gone Padmapārśva will be born in a place called Jewel Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty-six leagues. Wealth of Merit will be his father. Lady of the Land will be his mother. Auspicious will be his son. Fierce Splendor will be his attendant. Undisturbed Rest will be foremost in terms of insight. Mind Free from Delusion will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$688 “The thus-gone Ūrṇāvat will be born in a place called Attractive Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Banner of the Insightful will be his father. Equanimous Mind will be his mother. Joyous Roar will be his son. Delightful Roar will be his attendant. Crest of Humanity will be foremost in terms of insight. Certain Rest will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nine thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$689 “The thus-gone Pratibhāna­kīrti will be born in a place called Perfectly Pure Beauty. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-six thousand leagues. Liberation Joy will be his father. Jewel Possessor will be his mother. Royal Gift will be his son. Fragrance Qualities will be his attendant. Intelligence Free from Confusion will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three million six hundred thousand. [155.a] His lifespan will be one hundred forty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$690 “The thus-gone Maṇivajra will be born in a place called Jewel Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty-six leagues. Excellent Weapon will be his father. Excellent Edge will be his mother. Hidden Splendor will be his son. Subjugator of the Māras will be his attendant. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of insight. Conquering the Enemy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty-one consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$691 “The thus-gone Amitāyus will be born in a place called Luminous. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirteen thousand leagues. Supreme Excellence will be his father. Excellent Splendor will be his mother. Moon will be his son. Stainless Fame will be his attendant. Crest of Excellence will be foremost in terms of insight. Great Array will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one hundred thousand consecutive congregations, each of them gathering innumerable bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-one thousand years. For as long as the sacred Dharma remains all bodhisattvas will continue to appear. His relics will be abundant.
$692 “The thus-gone Maṇivyūha will be born in a place called Wisdom Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten million leagues. Array of Offerings will be his father. Qualities of Intelligence will be his mother. Merit Splendor will be his son. [155.b]Dharma Array will be his attendant. Wisdom Array will be foremost in terms of insight. Sight of Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be five consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eighty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$693 “The thus-gone Mahendra will be born in a place called Bright Movement. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Healer will be his father. Medicine will be his mother. Superior Wish will be his son. Star will be his attendant. Great Roar will be foremost in terms of insight. Roar Attainment will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$694 “The thus-gone Guṇākara will be born in a place called Endowed with Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Superior will be his father. Supreme Splendor will be his mother. Excellent Splendor will be his son. Divine Joy will be his attendant. Universal Knowledge will be foremost in terms of insight. Unaffected will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thirty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventeen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventeen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$695 “The thus-gone Meruyaśas will be born in a place called Endowed with Discipline. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Stainless Joy will be his father. [156.a]Qualities of Splendor will be his mother. Lamp Gift will be his son. Joyous Sight will be his attendant. Pure Eye will be foremost in terms of insight. Light Rays for the World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-three thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$696 “The thus-gone Daśaraśmi will be born in a place called Undefeatable Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-six thousand leagues. Beautiful Power will be his father. Fine Mind will be his mother. Highly Astute will be his son. Human will be his attendant. Delightful Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Delighting in Truth will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$697 “The thus-gone Anindita will be born in a place called Stūpa. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six thousand leagues. Vajra Gift will be his father. Jasmine Flower will be his mother. Delightful Roar will be his son. Certain Wisdom will be his attendant. Crest of Excellence will be foremost in terms of insight. Crusher of Non-Buddhist Outsiders will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$698 “The thus-gone Nāgakrama will be born in a place called Flower Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand leagues. [156.b]Dharma will be his father. Excellent Dharma will be his mother. Wealth God will be his son. Supreme Mind will be his attendant. Abode of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Luminous Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be ten billion worthy ones, in the second there will be nine hundred million, and in the third there will be eighty million. His lifespan will be six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$699 “The thus-gone Manoratha will be born in a place called Array of Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Universally Excellent will be his father. Delightful Gift will be his mother. Bright Strength will be his son. Without Suffering will be his attendant. Delightful Speech will be foremost in terms of insight. Joy for the World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$700 “The thus-gone Ratnacandra will be born in a place called Radiant Crest. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty-six thousand leagues. Jewel Mind will be his father. Divine Light will be his mother. Flower will be his son. Land of Chariots will be his attendant. Banner of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Star will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa. [157.a]
$701 “The thus-gone Śānta will be born in a place called Flawless. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight leagues. Intelligence of Peace will be his father. Splendor of Utter Peace will be his mother. Vast Joy will be his son. Complete will be his attendant. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of insight. Free from Delusion will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$702 “The thus-gone Pradyotarāja will be born in a place called Radiant Crest. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Most Clear will be his father. Intelligence Crest will be his mother. Splendid Gift will be his son. Excellent Sight will be his attendant. Infinite Hand will be foremost in terms of insight. Reveling will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine million eight hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for twenty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$703 “The thus-gone Sārathi will be born in a place called Radiant Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten million leagues. Sun Splendor will be his father. Fearlessness Gift will be his mother. Joyous Sight will be his son. Lamp Hand will be his attendant. Unperturbed Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Certain Firmness will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa. [157.b]
$704 “The thus-gone Nandeśvara will be born in a place called Endowed with Delightful Melody. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy thousand leagues. Joyous Melody will be his father. Lamp Gift will be his mother. Strength Gift will be his son. Delightful Melody will be his attendant. Mind of Truth will be foremost in terms of insight. Infinite Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather sixty billion worthy ones; in the second there will be seventy billion; in the third, eighty billion; in the fourth, ninety billion; and in the fifth, one hundred billion. His lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$705 “The thus-gone Ratnacūḍa will be born in a place called Stacked Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Jewel Mode will be his father. Merit Increase will be his mother. Supreme Dharma will be his son. Illuminator will be his attendant. Abiding Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Divine King will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$706 “The thus-gone Vigatabhaya will be born in a place called Gift of Life. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty thousand leagues. Excellent Light will be his father. Worshiper will be his mother. Certain Sight will be his son. Certain Gift will be his attendant. Stable Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Sage Leader will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be only one congregation, gathering innumerable members of the saṅgha of monks. [158.a] His lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-two thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$707 “The thus-gone Ratnagarbha will be born in a place called Free from the Aggregates. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six hundred million leagues. Light of Wisdom will be his father. Jewel of Intelligence will be his mother. Lotus Treasury will be his son. Resounding Fame will be his attendant. Indomitable Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Nonabiding Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering fourteen trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one billion years. His relics will be abundant.
$708 “The thus-gone Ratnacandra will be born in a place called Stainless. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty-two thousand leagues. Excellent Eye will be his father. Eye Gift will be his mother. Delightful Moon will be his son. Renowned Qualities will be his attendant. Essence of Acumen will be foremost in terms of insight. Unperturbed Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering two hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be six years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$709 “The thus-gone Vimalakīrti will be born in a place called Without Thorns. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred thousand leagues. Triple Knowledge will be his father. Excellent Wisdom will be his mother. Without Mud will be his son. Moon of Humanity will be his attendant. Renowned Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. [158.b] Sign Expert will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$710 The thus-gone Śāntatejas will be born in a place called Infinite Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as one hundred worlds of four continents. Infinite Splendor will be his father. Splendid will be his mother. Splendid Flower will be his son. Gentle Splendor will be his attendant. Unimpeded Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Power and Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty-nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$711 “The thus-gone Priyaketu will be born in a place
Called Joyful.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$712 “Exquisite Excellence will be his father and Dharma Intelligence his mother;
Illuminator will be his son and Virtue his attendant.
Supreme Fame will be the scholar
And Illuminator the one of miracles.
$713 “There will be eighty congregations, each of which will gather
Seven hundred thirty billion worthy ones
Who have relinquished all defilements.
The lifespan of humankind will be seventy-three thousand years.
$714 “After this knower of the world has transcended suffering
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be seventy-six thousand stūpas.
$715 “The thus-gone Rāhudeva
Will be born in a place called Joyful.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend eight leagues.
$716 “Excellent Splendor will be his father and Chariot of the Fortunate his mother;
Unsurpassable will be his son and Supreme Tree his attendant. [159.a]
Delightful Roar will be the scholar
And Gone to Bliss the one of miracles.
$717 “There will be sixty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred million.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And after the completion of exhaustion#135
$718 “The teachings will remain for ninety-three thousand years.
The relics will be abundant, and the jewel-studded stūpas,
Adorned with the seven precious substances,
Will number eight hundred sixty million.
$719 “The guide of the world, Suvayas,
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Jewels.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$720 “Wealth will be his father and Stūpa for Humanity his mother;
Rāhu will be his son and Excellent Joy his attendant.
Moving Legs will be the scholar
And Proclaimer the one of supreme miracles.
$721 “There will be eighty congregations,
Each of which will gather one hundred million
Completely unshakable worthy ones,
Liberated and stainless.
$722 “The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after the knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
The wheel of his Dharma will still be turned for one thousand years.
The relics will be abundant and contained in sixty-four thousand
$723 “Continuously circumambulated stūpas.
The thus-gone Amarapriya
Will be born in a place called Adorned with the Gods.
His family will be kṣatriya,
$724 “And his light will extend ten million leagues.
Excellent Youth will be his father and Equanimous Mind his mother;
Beautiful Joy will be his son and Joyous his attendant.
Lion of Humans will be the scholar
$725 “And Māra Crusher the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering sixty-two billion
Intelligent ones who have attained the highest peace.
$726 “The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
And after the teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain
For seventy-two thousand years.
$727 “His relics will be abundant, and there will appear
Nine hundred ninety billion excellent stūpas. [159.b]
The thus-gone Ratnaskandha
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Jewels.
$728 “His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend seventy leagues.
Unperturbed will be his father;
Supreme Jewel be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Mind will be his son and Moon his attendant.
$729 “Supreme Melody will be the scholar
And Defeater of Attacks the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thirty million
$730 “Stainless and unshakable beings of purified bodies.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And after this well-gone one has reached cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for a thousand years.
$731 “His relics will remain in a single collection
Within a stūpa five leagues tall.
The thus-gone Laḍitavikrama
Will be born in a place called Beautiful and Delightful.
$732 “His family will be brahmin and his light will extend three leagues.
Excellent Light Rays will be his father,
And Endowed with Flowers will be this victor’s mother.
Love will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
$733 “Supreme Mind will be the scholar
And Miraculous Display the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering thirty million
$734 “Selfless and untroubled beings, liberated from existence.
The lifespan of humans will be ten million years,
And after this teacher has gone to the highest peace
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-one thousand years.
$735 “The relics of this knower of the world will be abundant,
Contained in two hundred thirty million stūpas.
The thus-gone Siṃhapakṣa
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Merit.
$736 “His family will be brahmin and his light will extend eighteen leagues.
Exquisite Excellence will be his father;
Lotus Possessor will be his mother.
Supreme Leader will be his son and Dharma his attendant.
$737 “Hundred Light Rays will be the scholar
And Conqueror the one of miracles.
There will be ten congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred million [160.a]
$738 “Accomplished worthy ones free from attachment, who have gone beyond the swamp.
The lifespan of humans will be three hundred years,
And after the teacher has reached liberation
His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years.
$739 “There will be two billion stūpas
Draped in nets of gold.
The thus-gone Atyuccagāmin
Will be born in a place called Created by Gods.
$740 “His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend ninety-two leagues.
King of Trees will be his father;
Possessor of Joy will be his mother.
Qualities of Joy will be his son and Conqueror his attendant.
$741 “Joyous Worthy One will be the scholar
And the monk Famed Astrologer the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$742 “Beings of peace and gentleness.
The lifespan of humans will be forty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one free from thought
Will remain for nine thousand years.
$743 “There will be a single stūpa of this victorious one,
Three leagues tall and ornamented with gold.
The supreme human, Janendra,
Will be born in a place called Superior World.
$744 “His family will be brahmin and his light will extend three leagues.
Highest Veneration will be his father;
Fearless will be his mother.
Joy for the World will be his son and Conqueror his attendant.
$745 “Wisdom of the Gathering will be the scholar
And Melodious Thunder the one of miracles.
There will be sixteen congregations,
Each of them gathering sixty million
$746 “Purified and well-trained minds free from the three stains.
The lifespan of humans will be two thousand years,
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-two thousand years.
$747 “There will be twenty billion stūpas
Studded with jewels.
The moon of speech, Sumati,
Will be born in a place called Certain Brightness.
$748 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya and his light will extend two leagues. [160.b]
Unimpeded will be his father,
And Possessor of Jewels will be this victorious one’s mother.
Crusher will be his son and Gift of Excellence his attendant.
$749 “The monk Leader of the Gathering will be the scholar
And Defeater of Attacks will be the one of miracles.
There will be ninety congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred million
$750 “Beings who have cut through the knots and are free from craving, stain, and defilement.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred billion years,
And after this teacher has entered liberation his sacred Dharma
Will remain for two thousand years.
$751 “There will be a single, extraordinary stūpa,
One league large and studded with hundreds of special jewels.
The thus-gone Lokaprabha
Will be born in a place called Superior Splendor.
$752 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya and his light will extend sixty leagues.
Moon Mountain will be his father
And Endowed with Flowers his mother.
Beautiful Joy will be his son and Winner his attendant.
$753 “Famed Qualities will be the scholar
And Excellent Sandalwood will be the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering
$754 “Nine hundred ninety billion worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years
And the sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
The stūpa of this victorious one will be three leagues large,
$755 Shielded completely by a golden canopy
And adorned with ten billion parasols.
The thus-gone Ratnatejas
Will be born in a place called Display of Merit.
$756 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya and his light will extend thirteen leagues.
Excellent Lotus will be his father
And Teacher of Qualities his mother.
Blooming Flowers will be his son and Star his attendant.
$757 “Praised by Numerous Sages will be the scholar
And Joy for the World will be the one of miracles.
There will be one billion congregations,
Each of them gathering
$758 “One billion beings of purified mind, worthy of worship.
The lifespan of humans will be nine thousand years, [161.a]
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
$759 “The relics of this victorious will be abundant
And contained in eighty thousand stūpas.
The well-gone Bhāgīrathi
Will be born in a place called Starlight.
$760 “The family of this victor will be brahmin and his light will extend ten leagues.
Land of Excellence will be his father
And Supreme Jewel his mother.
Lord of Joy will be his son and Excellent Joy his attendant.
$761 “Radiant will be the scholar
And Source of Qualities the one of miracles.
There will be eighty congregations,
Each of them gathering
$762 “Nine hundred twenty million beings of liberated mind.
Their lifespan will be one hundred years,
And after this victor has accomplished exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-three thousand years.
$763 “His relics will be contained in seven hundred sixty billion stūpas
Adorned with nets of a hundred different jewels.
The protector of the world, Saṃjaya,
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Truth.
$764 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred twenty million leagues.
Ocean will be his father, and Lady of Splendor will be this victor’s mother.
Joy in Concentration will be his son and Deity his attendant.
$765 “Praised by the Worthy will be the scholar
And Destroyer of Attacks the one of miracles.
There will be eight congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
$766 “Who have abandoned the banner of pride.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this supreme human
Will remain for ten million years.
$767 “There will be one billion stūpas
Decorated with silver and pure pearls.
The thus-gone Rativyūha
Will be born in a place called Seen Always.
$768 “His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend ten million leagues.
Unperturbed will be his father,
And Beautiful Voice will be this victor’s mother. [161.b]
Gentle Melody will be his son and Star his attendant.
$769 “Joyous Movement will be the scholar
And Wish to Worship the Capable the one of miracles.
There will be two congregations,
Each of them gathering
$770 “Two hundred twenty thousand unperturbed worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be three thousand years,
And when this teacher has left nothing behind
His sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years.
$771 “The single stūpa of that time’s victor
Will measure ten leagues.
The thus-gone Tīrthakara
Will be born in a place called Blissful.
$772 “His family will be kṣatriya and his light will extend thirty leagues.
Power will be his father,
And Abandoning Doubts will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Tree will be his son and Skillful his attendant.
$773 “Earth Holder will be the scholar
And Mountain Shaker the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering ninety million
$774 “Who have crossed the ocean of craving.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
And when this teacher has accomplished exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-six thousand years.
$775 “His relics will be abundant, and the excellent stūpas
 Will number two hundred twenty billion.
The thus-gone Gandhahastin
Will be born in a place called Clear Fragrance.
$776 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty million leagues.
Excellent Hand will be his father, and Lady of the Land will be this victor’s mother.
Sharing will be his son and Fierce his attendant.
$777 “Firm Certainty will be the scholar
And Elephant Gaze the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
$778 “Who have crossed the swamp and are free from ignorance.
The lifespan of humans will be fifteen thousand years,
And when this teacher has left nothing behind
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-nine thousand years.
$779 “The relics of this victor will be abundant, [162.a]
Enshrined in seventy billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Arciṣmati
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Merit.
$780 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will permeate throughout all realms.
Excellent Light will be his father and Glorious Splendor his mother.
Attractive Splendor will be his son and Fame his attendant.
$781 “Adorned with Qualities will be the scholar
And Terrifier of Existence the one of miracles.
There will be forty thousand congregations,
Each of them gathering thirty billion
$782 “Who abide within the eight liberations.
The lifespan of this victor will be one hundred years,
And once he has attained nirvāṇa his sacred Dharma will,
To the benefit of beings, remain for one thousand years.
$783 “The relics of this victor will remain in a single collection and there will be a single stūpa,
Measuring seventy leagues and adorned with banners.
The thus-gone Merudhvaja
Will be born in a place called Wondrous Stūpa.
$784 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Human will be his father and Abandoner of Anger will be his immaculate mother.
Divine Joy will be his son and Star King his attendant.
$785 “Ocean of Learning will be the scholar
And Destroyer of Attacks the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six congregations,
Each of them gathering ten million unshakable worthy ones
$786 “Who have cultivated the levels of peaceful absorption.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
And when the teacher has departed in peace his sacred Dharma
Will remain complete for ten thousand years.
$787 “There will be thirty million fine stūpas,
Adorned with supreme flowers, emblems, and banners.
The well-gone Sugandha
Will be born in a place called Incense Ornament.
$788 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend eight hundred million leagues.
Fine and Noble Mind will be his father and Incense Stūpa will be this victorious one’s mother.
Wealth Lover will be his son and Joy his attendant.
$789 “Supreme Peace will be the scholar
And Supreme Stūpa the one of miracles. [162.b]
Those who are free from attachment to the three realms and teach accordingly,
Who are beyond desire and have purified unwholesomeness,
$790 “Will gather in congregations beyond count.
The lifespan of humans will be three million years,
And after the supreme protector has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will endure.
$791 “There will be eighty thousand stūpas
Along with four thousand that are endowed with golden banners.
The thus-gone Dṛḍhadharma
Will be born in a place called Fierce Light.
$792 “This victor’s family will be brahmin
And his light will extend one hundred thousand leagues.
Seeing Correctly will be his father and Seeing Completely Correctly will be this victorious one’s mother.
Excellent Merit will be his son and Exquisite Splendor his attendant.
$793 “Stūpa for Yogic Discipline will be the scholar
And Certain Insight the one of miracles.
There will be eleven congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
$794 “Who have become unshakable.
The lifespan of humans will be two hundred thousand years,
And after this unparalleled one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty years.
$795 “The excellent stūpas will number seven hundred sixty million
And their surroundings will be adorned with jewels and banners.
The thus-gone Ugratejas
Will be born in a place called Irreproachable Splendor.
$796 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten million leagues.
Masterful Hand will be his father and Endowed with Clouds will be this victorious one’s mother.
Certainty will be his son and Hero his attendant.
$797 “Exhaustion of Birth will be the one of knowledge
And Shaker of the Realms the one of miracles.
There will be five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
$798 “Who have transcended the world and gone beyond existence.
The lifespan of this immaculate one will be two hundred years,
And for the benefit of the world his sacred Dharma
Will remain for two thousand years.
$799 “The relics of this victor will remain in one collection
And the single, jewel-studded stūpa will measure sixty leagues.
The thus-gone Maṇidharman
Will be born in a place called White Lotus. [163.a]
$800 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Excellent Joy will be his father and Supreme Joy will be this victorious one’s mother.
Joyous Knowledge will be his son and Excellent Brahmā his attendant.
$801 “Equanimous Mind will be the scholar
And Illuminator of the World the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eighty beings
$802 “Who have defeated dullness and ignorance and attained cessation.
The lifespan of humans will be three thousand years,
And after this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$803 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be thirty-sixty thousand fine stūpas.
The world protector Bhadradatta
Will be born in a place called Lotus Crest.
$804 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twelve leagues.
Heap of Excellence will be his father and Sun Continuum his mother.
Brahmā Joy will be his son and Accomplishment his attendant.
$805 “Worshiped by Gods will be the scholar
And Clarity Free from Dullness the one of miracles.
There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
$806 “Sons of the victorious ones.
His lifespan will be one hundred thousand years,
And after this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy years.
$807 “Subsequent to this well-gone one’s nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant, and there will be four stūpas.
The well-gone guide of humanity, Candra,
Will be born in a place called Splendid Creation.
$808 “This victor will be of kṣatriya family,
And his light will extend eight leagues.
Excellent Crest will be his father, and Endowed with Excellence will be this victor’s mother.
Medicine will be his son and Even Limbs his attendant.
$809 “Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Superior God the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations
Of this great sage’s detached children,
$810 “Whose minds are serene like mountains. [163.b]
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two years,
And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite fame
Will remain complete for three hundred years.
$811 “There will be a single fine stūpa of this victor,
Measuring eight leagues of beauty.
The well-gone Brahmasvara
Will be born in a place called Melody of Joy.
$812 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Excellent Youth will be his father and Divine Joy his mother.
Joyous will be his son and Trained his attendant.
$813 “Ocean of Qualities will be the scholar
And Miraculous Wisdom Display the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each gathering ten million joyous meditators,
$814 “Free from anger, peaceful, and gentle.
The lifespan of humans will be sixteen thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
$815 “And there will be eighty thousand stūpas,
Adorned with banners and draped with nets.
The thus-gone Siṃhacandra
Will be born in a place called Seen Always.
$816 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ninety-two leagues.
Gift of Excellence will be his father and Buddha Intelligence his mother.
Dissimilar Eyes will be his son and Moon his attendant.
$817 “Splendid Adornment will be the one of wisdom
And Ascertainment the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each gathering six million three hundred thousand selfless ones,
$818 “Detached from the world and immutable.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after this supreme protector has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$819 “The relics of this victor will remain in a single collection,
And there will be a single stūpa of three leagues, adorned with banners.
The incomparable buddha Śrī
Will be born in a place called Beautiful World.
$820 “This victorious one will be of kṣatriya family,
And his light will extend one league.
Free from Suffering will be his father and Joyous Beauty his mother. [164.a]
Free from Thorns will be his son and Joy his attendant.
$821 “Worshiped by the People will be the scholar
And Defeater of Attacks the one of miracles.
There will be four hundred eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them exclusively gathering immaculate ones who are liberated from existence
$822 “And have relinquished the mud, the net, and the darkness.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred years,
And after this supreme protector has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty years.
$823 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be sixty-six thousand fine stūpas.
The knower of the world, Sujāta,
Will be born in a place called Gentle.
$824 “The family of this victorious one will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seven hundred million leagues.
Great Being will be his father, and Light Nourisher will be this victor’s mother.
Flash of Lightning will be his son and Fierce his attendant.
$825 “Ocean of Qualities will be the scholar
And Dispeller of Flaws the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred thirty million
$826 “Nonabiding ones of universal perfection.
The lifespan of humans will be two thousand years,
And after this teacher has gone beyond
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-six thousand years.
$827 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be three billion fine stūpas.
The buddha Ajitagaṇa
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Marks.
$828 “The family of this victorious one will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Meaningful will be his father and Endowed with Fame his mother.
Excellent Moon will be his son and Truth his attendant.
$829 “Powerful Movement will be the scholar
And Splendid Miraculous Display the one of miracles.
There will be forty thousand consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten million children of the great sage,
$830 “Who are all liberated from the bonds of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be forty thousand years,
And after the world’s superior has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. [164.b]
$831 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be nine billion golden stūpas.
The thus-gone Yaśomitra
Will be born in a place called Superior Fame.
$832 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety million leagues.
Radiant Sacrifice will be his father and Endowed with Merit his mother.
Sage will be his son and Distinguished his attendant.
$833 “True Qualities will be the scholar
And Fearless Mind the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred forty million liberators
$834 “Who destroy the hordes of the māras.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
And this incomparable one’s sacred Dharma
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
$835 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be seven hundred sixty million fine stūpas.
The thus-gone Satya
Will be born in a place called Splendid Beauty.
$836 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred million leagues.
Lord of Humans will be his father and Fortunate Wish his mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Excellent Sacrifice his attendant.
$837 “Fame will be the knowledgeable one
And Miraculous Display the one of miracles.
There will be ten billion consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seventy billion worthy ones
$838 “Who are free from the three stains, utterly immaculate.
His lifespan will be thirty thousand years,
And when this victor has entered peace
His sacred Dharma will remain for nine thousand years.
$839 “The relics of this victor will remain in a single collection,
And there will be one stūpa, measuring nine league and studded with hundreds of jewels.
The well-gone Mahātapas
Will be born in a place called Satisfying the Unprotected.
$840 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Excellent Light Rays will be his father and Possessor of Joy his mother.
Fearless will be his son and Fame his attendant.
$841 “Famed Illuminator will be the knowledgeable one
And Mountain Shaker the one of miracles. [165.a]
There will be seven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seventy-three billion
$842 “Possessors of the six superknowledges, who are free from ignorance.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who has relinquished the aggregates
Will remain for nine hundred thousand years.
$843 “The relics of this victor will abundant
And the fine stūpas will number two hundred twenty million.
The immaculate Meruraśmi
Will be born in a place called Superior World.
$844 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Gift of Excellence will be his father and Looking will be this victorious one’s mother.
Excellent Worship will be his son and Liberation his attendant.
$845 “Qualities of Insight will be the scholar
And Proclaiming Friend the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
$846 “Whose teachings are the same and who have reached completion.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after the victorious one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy years.
$847 “His relics will be contained in one thousand fine stūpas
Adorned with jewels and beautiful banners.
The thus-gone one Guṇakūṭa
Will be born in a place called Superior Awakening.
$848 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
Wealthy Being will be his father and Delighting in Qualities his mother.
Proclaimer will be his son and Meaningful his attendant.
$849 “Adorned will be the scholar
And Supreme Teaching the one of miracles.
There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion worthy ones,
$850 “Meditators who relinquish the three realms.
The lifespan of humans will be three thousand years,
And after the teacher has gone to cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years.
$851 “The fine stūpas studded with jewels [165.b]
Will number nine hundred twenty million.
The immaculate Arhadyaśas
Will be born in a place called Faithful World.
$852 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
Excellent Field will be his father and Directed Mind his mother.
Fine Countenance will be his son and Without Pretense his attendant.
$853 “Joyous Roar will be the scholar
And Purified the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
$854 “Meditators who have attained freedom from pride.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
And after this teacher has gone to liberation
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-two thousand years.
$855 “Stūpas adorned with golden banners and measuring twelve leagues
Will number sixty-six thousand.
The thus-gone one Dharmakīrti
Will be born in a place called Certainty.
$856 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Lord will be his father and Immutable Intelligence his mother.
Rahuśa will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
$857 “Worshiped by the World will be the scholar
And Famed Worship the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$858 “Eradicators of the hordes of the māras.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And for the sake of benefiting the world
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years.
$859 “The relics of the victorious one will be abundant
And there will appear thirty million fine stūpas.
The well-gone one Dānaprabha
Will be born in a place called Ecstatic World.
$860 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eleven leagues.
Great Being will be his father and Delighting in the Objects his mother.
Source of Dharma will be his son and Splendor his attendant.
$861 “Ocean of Qualities will be the scholar
And Fearless World the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three billion [166.a]
$862 “Lotus-like beings for whom nothing is left.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
And after this teacher has gone beyond
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
$863 “The relics of this victorious one will remain in a single collection
Within a banner-studded stūpa measuring one hundred leagues.
The thus-gone one Vidyuddatta
Will be born in a place called Always Illuminated.
$864 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty million leagues.
Excellent Mind will be his father, and Joy of Awakening will be this victor’s mother.
Perfect Wisdom will be his son and Distinguished his attendant.
$865 “Looking with Joy will be the scholar
And Fearless Mind the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seventy-six billion worthy ones
$866 “Whose minds are pure.
The lifespan of humans will be two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this victor who has gone to liberation
Will remain for six thousand years.
$867 “His relics will remain in a single stūpa of five leagues.
The thus-gone one Satyakathin
Will be born in a place called Worthy of Worship.
His family will be brahmin,
$868 “And his light will extend one hundred million leagues.
Great Being will be his father, and Famed Stūpa will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Dharmawill be his son and Endowed with Dharma his attendant.
Māra Crusher will be the scholar
$869 “And Dispeller of Suffering the one of miracles.
There will be five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thirty million
Undefiled meditators free from ‘I.’
$870 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this victor who has attained the Dharma
Will remain for twenty-one thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
$871 “And there will be three billion fine stūpas.
The protector of the world, Jīvaka,
Will be born in a place called Universal Wealth.
His family will be brahmin, [166.b]
$872 “And his light will extend three leagues.
Fine Face will be his father, and Moving with Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Royal Gift will be his son and Excellent Body his attendant.
King of the Supreme Refuge will be the one of intelligence
$873 “And Masterful Astrologer the one of miracles.
There will be seven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred forty million sages
Who are free from ignorance and delight in liberation.
$874 “The lifespan of humans will be two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one above the three worlds
Will remain for ninety-two thousand years.
The number of excellent stūpas
$875 “Will reach ninety-five billion.
The thus-gone Suvayas
Will be born in a place called Always Desired.
His family will be kṣatriya,
$876 “And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Free from Suffering will be his father, and Endowed with Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Great Joy will be his son and Moon his attendant.
Beautiful Mode will be the one of intelligence
$877 “And Fearless Deity the one of miracles.
There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Worthy ones free from doubt.
$878 “The lifespan of humans will be one thousand years,
And after this victor has entered the immutable
His sacred Dharma will remain three thousand years.
His relics will be abundant, and the stūpas adorned with relics
$879 “Will number two billion.
The well-gone Sadgaṇin
Will be born in a place called Golden Mountain.
His family will be brahmin,
$880 “And his light will extend ninety-three leagues.
Excellent Worship will be his father and Skilled in Gathering this victor’s mother.
Highest will be his son and Flawless his attendant.
Looking will be the one of knowledge
$881 “And Ocean Mountain the one of miracles.
There will be five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten thousand
Who have become free from craving for existence and made an end to birth.
$882 “The lifespan of humans will be four thousand years,
And after this teacher has accomplished exhaustion [167.a]
His sacred Dharma will remain for six thousand years.
There will be two hundred twenty million stūpas of this victor,
$883 “Adorned with hundreds of fine banners.
The victor Viniścitamati
Will be born in a place called Certain Worship.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$884 “And his light will extend fifteen leagues.
Sumeru will be his father, and Holder of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Mark will be his son and Excellent Sight his attendant.
Endowed with the Ten Powers will be the scholar
$885 “And Nāga Display the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred seventy million meditators
Who have rid themselves of the web of views.
$886 “The lifespan of humans will be eighteen thousand years,
And after this teacher has accomplished exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-seven thousand years.
There will be seventy-four stūpas of this victor,
$887 “Adorned with beautiful jewel nets.
The thus-gone Bhavānta­maṇi­gandha
Will be born in a place called Joyous Faith.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$888 “And his light will extend ten million leagues.
Joyous Wealth will be his father, and Supreme Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Virtue will be his son and Helpful his attendant.
Māra Crusher will be the one of intellect
$889 “And Unperturbed Mind the one of miracles.
There will be nine consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
Mountain-like beings of unshakable mind.
$890 “The lifespan of humans will be ten billion years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-two thousand years,
Plus ninety-nine thousand further years.
The single stūpa of relics will measure five leagues
$891 “And be adorned with jewels, banners, and nets.
The thus-gone Jayanandin
Will be born in a place called Purified Mind.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$892 “And his light will extend six leagues.
Saga will be his father, and Joyous Worthy One will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Worship will be his son and Awoken from Sleep his attendant.
Crusher of Attacks will be the scholar
$893 “And Auspicious World the one of miracles. [167.b]
There will be eighty-three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering twenty million
Who are detached from all of existence.
$894 “The lifespan of humans will be three hundred twenty million years,
And after this victorious one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will without a doubt remain ten million years.
The stūpas will number two billion
$895 “And be adorned with hundreds of thousands of fabrics.
The thus-gone Siṃharaśmi
Will be born in a place called Certainly Fierce.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$896 “And his light will extend ten million leagues.
Excellent Companion will be his father and Meaningful Roar his mother.
Meaningful will be his son and Great Meaning his attendant.
Joy in Virtue will be the scholar
$897 “And Imaginary Self the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering limitless billions
Who have abandoned pride.
$898 “The lifespan of humans will be fourteen thousand years,
And the victorious one’s sacred Dharma
Will remain for ten thousand plus thirty-six thousand further years.
There will be ten billion stūpas
$899 “Surrounded by golden banners.
The thus-gone Vairocana
Will be born in a place called Infinite Fame.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$900 “And his light will extend ten million leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father, and Worshiped by Humanity will be this victor’s mother.
Instiller of Joy will be his son and Steadfast his attendant.
Heroic Courage will be the scholar
$901 “And Abiding in Precious Strength the one of miracles.
There will be seven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering
Twenty-six quadrillion worthy ones.
$902 “His lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years,
And this victorious one’s sacred Dharma
Will remain for seventeen thousand years.
This victor’s relics will be contained in one stūpa measuring two leagues
$903 “And adorned with jewel nets.
Yaśottara who is free from defilements [168.a]
Will be born in a place called Light of Fame.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$904 “And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Excellent Garland will be his father, and Flower Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Royal Gift will be his son and Divine Excellence his attendant.
Shaker of Existence will be the scholar
$905 “And Destroyer of Doubt the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
And then again twenty-four,
Each of them gathering ten billion.
$906 “The lifespan of humans will be eighty-two thousand years,
And this teacher’s sacred Dharma
Will remain complete for seventeen thousand years.
This victor’s relics will be abundant,
$907 “And there will be one hundred stūpas.
The guide of humans, Sumedhas,
Will be born in a place called Wisdom View.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$908 “And his light will extend five leagues.
Lamp will be his father, and Joy in Factors of Awakening will be this victor’s mother.
Human will be his son and Excellent Virtue his attendant.
Worshiped by the World will be the scholar
$909 “And Possessor of the Supreme Power of Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be eighty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them consisting exclusively of worthy ones
Who destroy the world’s attacks without deceit or pretense.
$910 “The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
And once this teacher has accomplished exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years.
This victor’s relics will be abundant,
$911 “And the amount of stūpas will reach ninety million.
The thus-gone one, Maṇicandra,
Will be born in a place called Seen with the Eyes.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$912 “And his light will extend ten leagues.
Excellent Light Rays will be his father, and Endowed with Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Dharma Wish will be his son and Star King his attendant.
Seeing the World will be the scholar
$913 “And Clarity of Friendship the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion worthy ones
Endowed with excellent realization and equal in terms of discipline.
$914 “The lifespan of humans will be twelve thousand years, [168.b]
And once this victor has pacified existence
His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years.
There will be sixty-two stūpas of this victor,
$915 “Adorned with sixteen thousand parasols.
The thus-gone Ugraprabha
Will be born in a place called Constant Light.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$916 “And his light will cover eight times the extent of the four continents.
Melody will be his father and Victorious his mother.
Leader will be his son and Inseparable his attendant.
Expertise will be the scholar
$917 “And Praised by the World the one of miracles.
There will be eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred forty million selfless ones
Who have given up grasping at the aggregates.
$918 “The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain
For forty-six thousand years.
The relics will be abundant, and the fine stūpas
$919 “Will number two hundred twenty billion.
The thus-gone Anihatavrata
Will be born in a place called Filled with Joy.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$920 “And his light will extend ten leagues.
Divine King will be his father, and Lady of the Land will be this victor’s mother.
Love will be his son and Strong Love his attendant.
Equal Wisdom will be the scholar
$921 “And Attainer of Excellent Certainty the one of miracles.
There will be eleven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million worthy ones
As well as eight thousand extraordinary others.
$922 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain
For sixty-nine thousand years.
The stūpas will number one billion fifty million
$923 “And be adorned with golden banners.
The lustrous Jagatpūjita
Will be born in a place called Purified Mind.
His family will be brahmin,
$924 “And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Strong Love will be his father and Famed Intelligence his mother. [169.a]
Jewel will be his son and Excellent Jewel his attendant.
Great Yogic Discipline will be the scholar
$925 “And Supreme Holy Man the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Along with twenty-two more,
Each of them gathering one hundred eighty billion.
$926 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this true object of worship
Will remain for one thousand years.
The relics will be abundant and there will be eighty-two thousand stūpas
$927 “Studded with jewels and adorned with living beings.
The thus-gone Maṇigaṇa
Will be born in a place called Unparalleled Splendor.
His family will be brahmin,
$928 “And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Lord of Sages will be his father and Divine Joy his mother.
Divine will be his son and Divine Excellence his attendant.
Lord of Humans will be the scholar
$929 “And Abiding in Nonattachment the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who have perfected the types of correct knowledge.
$930 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain complete
For forty thousand years.
There will be one hundred million stūpas of this victor,
$931 “Surrounded by golden lotuses.
The thus-gone Lokottara
Will be born in a place called Truly Superior Merit.
His family will be kṣatriya,
$932 “And his light will extend eight hundred million leagues.
Glorious will be this victor’s father and Divine Purity his mother.
Lotus will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
Universal Joy will be the scholar
$933 “And Light of Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be six thousand consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion worthy ones,
Who will reach the nirvāṇa without remainder.
$934 “The lifespan of humans will be eighty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to cessation
Will remain for two thousand years.
There will be ninety-four stūpas [169.b]
$935 “Adorned with jewel fences.
The thus-gone Siṃhahastin
Will be born in a place called Lovely Radiance.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$936 “And his light will extend nine leagues.
Excellent Sacrifice will be his father, and Joyous World will be this victor’s mother.
Flower will be his son and Excellent Flower his attendant.
Worthy of Worship will be the scholar
$937 “And Venerated by Gods the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion worthy ones
Whose minds are purified and endowed with insight of tremendous certainty.
$938 “The lifespan of humans will be seven-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain
Intact for fifty million years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
$939 “And there will be one billion one hundred and five thousand stūpas.
The thus-gone Candra
Will be born in a place called Ever Stable Essence.
His family will be brahmin,
$940 “And his light will extend one league.
Lord of Sālas will be his father, and Teacher of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Dharma Gift will be his son and Excellent Dharma his attendant.
Serene Joy will be the scholar
$941 “And Not Dwelling in the World the one of miracles.
There will be eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Who have perfected the cultivation of insight.
$942 “The lifespan of humans will be seven-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for the benefit of beings,
Likewise for seventy-four thousand years.
After this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
$943 “There will be two billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Ratnārci
Will be born in a place called Light of Insight.
His family will be kṣatriya,
$944 “And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
Water King will be his father, and Virtuous will be this victor’s mother.
Delighting in Knowledge will be his son and Divine his attendant.
Endowed with the Eye of Intelligence will be the scholar
$945 “And Purified Mind the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations, [170.a]
Gathering nothing but attainers of liberation, detached from the world,
Renunciants#136 free from delusion.
$946 “The lifespan of humans will be three thousand years,
And after the teacher has gone to peace
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for three thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$947 “Measuring three leagues and adorned with jewel nets.
The thus-gone Rāhuguhya
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Virtue.
His family will be brahmin,
$948 “And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Powerful will be his father and Highest Fame his mother.
Divine Joy will be his son and Endowed with Dharma his attendant.
Gold-Like will be the scholar
$949 “And Illuminator of the World the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations, followed by twenty,
Each gathering trillions
Who are all, without exception, free from what plagues beings.
$950 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy-six thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain intact for ten thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
$951 “And the stūpas will number two hundred twenty million.
The thus-gone Guṇasāgara
Will be born in a place called Lamp of Awakening.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$952 “And his light will extend thirty leagues.
Excellent Lotus will be his father and Lotus Possessor his mother.
Lotus will be his son and Excellent Lotus his attendant.
Qualities of Fragrance and Light will be the scholar
$953 “And All-Illuminating the one of miracles.
There will be one hundred consecutive congregations,
Each gathering two hundred twenty million
Who have attained a mind that is, as it were, free from vegetation.
$954 “The lifespan of humans will be twenty-eight thousand years,
And when the teacher has accomplished exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
$955 “And the number of stūpas will reach eighty thousand.
The thus-gone Sahitaraśmi
Will be born in a place called Free from Delusion.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$956 “And his light will extend twenty-two leagues. [170.b]
Excellent Virtue will be his father and Supreme Jewel his mother.
Swaying Limbs will be his son and Endowed with Lovely Limbs his attendant.
Song of Adornment will be the scholar
$957 “And Fearless Mind the one of miracles.
There will be eighteen consecutive congregations,
Each gathering three hundred billion
Who through meditation have turned the defilements to dust.
$958 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$959 “One league tall and adorned with parasols.
The buddha Praśāntagati
Will be born in a place called Beautifully Worshiped.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$960 “And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Excellent Brahmā will be his father and Mind of Expertise his mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Auspicious Star his attendant.
Delighting Men and Women will be the scholar
$961 “And Faithful World the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each gathering one hundred million worthy monks
Who have gone beyond the world.
$962 “The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this teacher
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
$963 “And there will be ten million stūpas.
The well-gone Lokasundara
Will be born in a place called Happy Event.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$964 “And his light will extend three leagues.
Excellent Doctor will be his father, and Venerated by Many will be this victor’s mother.
Moon and Sun will be his son and Medicine his attendant.
Supreme Wisdom will be the scholar
$965 “And Abiding Free from Dullness the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering
Five billion worthy ones.
$966 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
And for the benefit of beings the sacred Dharma [171.a]
Will remain for fifteen thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$967 “Measuring nine leagues and studded with excellent jewels.
The supreme human, Aśoka,
Will be born in a place called Suppression of Suffering.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$968 “And his light will extend eleven leagues.
Free from Suffering will be his father, and Suffering Relinquished will be this victor’s mother.
Gorgeous will be his son and Fine Beauty his attendant.
Highly Adorned will be the one of knowledge
$969 “And Miraculous Mind the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering four hundred million
Whose minds are serene.
$970 “The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
And for the benefit of beings the sacred Dharma
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
There will be two billion stūpas
$971 “Adorned with pearls, banners, and supreme jewels.
The thus-gone Daśavaśa
Will be born in a place called Venerated When Seen.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$972 “And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Powerful Lord will be his father, and Delightful Roar will be this victor’s mother.
Delightful Voice will be his son and Excellent his attendant.
Beautiful Melody will be the scholar
$973 “And Lion Stance the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
Who are immutable like Sumeru.
$974 “The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this victor
Will remain for sixteen thousand years.
When this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa,
$975 “His relics will remain in a single stūpa ten leagues tall.
The thus-gone Balanandin
Will be born in a place called Melody of Joy.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$976 “And his light will extend nine leagues.
Gift of Excellence will be his father, and Supreme Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Joy will be his son and Great Nāga his attendant.
Illuminator of the Three Worlds will be the scholar [171.b]
$977 “And Supreme Fearlessness the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thousand
Who are free from grasping an ‘I’ and detached, as if they were grass.
$978 “The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
There will be seventy-four thousand stūpas,
Resembling heavenly palaces of divine substance
$979 “And adorned with golden banners.
The well-gone Sthāmaśrī
Will be born in a place called Hidden Excellent Stability.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$980 “And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Fine and Noble Mind will be his father, and Lotus Possessor will be this victor’s mother.
Divine King will be his son and Lord of the Gathering his attendant.
Trained Mind will be the scholar
$981 “And Unperturbed Mind the one of miracles.
There will be one hundred sixteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
Whose minds are nonabiding, like open space.
$982 “The lifespan of humans will be one thousand years,
And for the benefit of beings the sacred Dharma
Will remain for sixty-six thousand years.
The relics of the one gone to peace will be abundant,
$983 “Contained in twenty million precious stūpas.
The thus-gone Sthāmaprāpta
Will be born in a place called Supreme Abiding.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$984 “And his light will extend three leagues.
Reveling will be his father, and Ascertained will be this victor’s mother.
Irreproachable will be his son and Trained his attendant.
Joyous World will be the scholar
$985 “And Splendid Heap of Merit the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three billion worthy ones
Free from all wounds and contagions.
$986 “The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain
For ninety-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in seven stūpas,
$987 “One league large and adorned with gold.
The thus-gone Mahāsthāman
Will be born in a place called Hard to Conquer. [172.a]
His family will be kṣatriya,
$988 “And his light will extend thirty-three leagues.
Palace will be his father and Joyous Mind his mother.
Leader will be his son and Utterly True his attendant.
Attractive Movement will be the scholar
$989 “And Remaining Detached the one of miracles.
There will be forty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred billion
Whose minds are all like full moons.
$990 “The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
And for the benefit of beings the sacred Dharma will remain
For fourteen thousand years.
After this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
$991 “There will appear ten billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Guṇagarbha
Will be born in a place called Venerated Stūpa.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$992 “And his light will extend one league.
Great Being will be his father, and Worship Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Possessor of Miraculous Power will be his son and Tremendous Wealth his attendant.
Joyous Water God will be the scholar
$993 “And Brahmā Deity the one of miracles.
There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who are free from the dirt of the three stains and have attained detachment.
$994 “The lifespan of this victorious one will be eleven thousand years,
And for the benefit of the three worlds
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-three thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa of this victor’s relics,
$995 “Four leagues large and adorned with a thousand parasols.
The thus-gone Satyacara
Will be born in a place called Truth Wish.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$996 “And his light will extend six leagues.
Powerful Peace will be his father, and Beautiful Light will be this victor’s mother.
Possessor of the Supreme will be his son and Excellent Meaning his attendant.
Powerful Qualities will be the scholar
$997 “And Supreme Power the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
Who have all entirely relinquished the stains of defilement.
$998 “The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace [172.b]
Will remain for ninety-nine thousand years.
There will be ninety-four thousand stūpas of this victor,
$999 “Adorned with jewel arches and gold.
The thus-gone Kṣemottamarāja
Will be born in a place called Indomitable Fearlessness.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$1000 “And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Elephant King will be his father, and Equal Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Joy in Existence will be his son and Worship his attendant.
Roaring Acumen will be the scholar
$1001 “And Superior Fame the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million sages
Who are free from the realm of the māras.
$1002 “The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain complete for three thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa of two leagues,
$1003 “Adorned with golden banners and parasols.
The well-gone Tiṣya, the ocean of qualities,
Will be born in a place called Studded with Signs.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$1004 “And his light will extend nine leagues.
Intelligent will be his father, and Joyous Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Wrathful will be his son and Immaculate his attendant.
Abandoning Doubt will be the scholar
$1005 “And Crusher of Doubts the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who have dispelled all entities and cut through the bonds.
$1006 “The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain
For thirty-two thousand years.
There will be ninety-nine thousand stūpas,
$1007 “Richly adorned, like divine palaces.
The thus-gone Mahāraśmi
Will be born in a place called Light of Merit.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
$1008 “And his light will extend ten leagues.
Crest of Excellence will be his father, and Crest of Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Gift of the Gods will be his son and Highest his attendant.
Stirrer of the Ocean of Existence will be the scholar
$1009 “And Supreme River of Speech the one of miracles. [173.a]
There will be nine consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred ninety million
Whose minds have dried up the ocean of existence.
$1010 “The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace will remain
For seventy-one thousand years.
His relics will be abundant.
$1011 There will be ninety thousand stūpas, covering the entire earth.
The master of qualities Vidyutprabha
Will be born in a place called Splendidly Adorned.
His family will be brahmin,
$1012 “And his light will extend five hundred leagues.
Excellent Hand will be his father, and Thought of by Gods will be this victor’s mother.
Cultivator will be his son and Fine Face his attendant.
Supreme Fame will be the scholar
$1013 “And King of Leaders the one of miracles.
There will be eleven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred million
Who have attained authentic fearlessness in accord with the Dharma.
$1014 “The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
And for the benefit of beings the sacred Dharma
Will remain for nine hundred thousand years.
The stūpas of this victor will be four leagues large,
$1015 “Surrounded by golden stūpas and banners.
The well-gone protector Guṇavisṛta
Will be born in a place called Blooming Night.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
$1016 “And his light will extend six leagues.
Excellent Mind will be his father, and Intelligent will be this victor’s mother.
Realizer will be his son and Intelligent his attendant.
Intelligent Movement will be the scholar
$1017 “And Miraculous Intelligence the one of miracles.
There will be seven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Who are unshakable like mountain peaks.
$1018 “The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
And when the able victor has gone to peace
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
There will be two billion stūpas
$1019 “Adorned with thousands of jewels.
The guide of humanity, Ratna,
Will be born in a place called Abundant Jewels. [173.b]
His family will be kṣatriya,
$1020 “And his light will engulf thousands of realms.
Excellent Jewel will be his father and Supreme Jewel will be this victor’s mother.
Gift of Joy will be his son and Distinguished his attendant.
Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
$1021 “And Revolving Mind the one of miracles.
There will be eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred sixty million
Who cut through the ties of existence.
$1022 “The lifespan of humans will be sixty-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-five thousand years.
The stūpa of this victorious one will measure three leagues
And be adorned with millions of crown jewels.
$1023 “The recipient of the world’s worship, Śrīprabha,
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Lotuses.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one league.
$1024 Auspicious will be his father and Lady of Fine Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Gift of Protection will be his son and Excellent Protection his attendant.
Joyous Beauty will be the scholar
And Proclaimer of Liberation the one of miracles.
$1025 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
Who are all stainless and resemble the full moon.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
$1026 “And the sacred Dharma of this supreme human
Will remain for twenty-one thousand years.
His relics will be abundant, and the fine stūpas
Will number three hundred thirty million.
$1027 “The victorious Māradama
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Merit.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend five hundred leagues.
$1028 “Vast will be his father and Gathering of Light will be this victor’s mother.
Gentle will be his son and Water God his attendant.
Supreme Light of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Ascertainer of the Meaning the one of miracles.
$1029 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two billion
Whose minds have achieved detachment.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1030 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite fame [174.a]
Will remain for forty-six thousand years.
The fine stūpas containing his relics in the world
Will number two billion.
$1031 “The thus-gone Kṛtavarman
Will be born in a place called Beautiful to Behold.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
$1032 Excellent Light will be his father and Certain Love will be this victor’s mother.
Gold will be his son and Pure his attendant.
Flower Joy will be the one with knowledge
And Cluster of Forms the one of miracles.
$1033 “There will be forty million consecutive congregations,
As well as sixty-six,
Each of them gathering eighty thousand.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-five thousand years,
$1034 “And the sacred Dharma of this supreme protector
Will remain for seventy-five thousand years.
The stūpa of this victorious one will be four leagues large
And beautifully adorned with golden light.
$1035 “The thus-gone Siṃhahasta
Will be born in a place called Definitive Meaning.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-six leagues.
$1036 “Not Inferior will be his father and Nectar Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Dharma will be his son and Wish to Benefit his attendant.
Supreme Wisdom will be the scholar
And Decisive Attainment the one of miracles.
$1037 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred million
Who have attained liberation through the supreme vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-two thousand years,
$1038 “And after this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-nine years.
The single stūpa containing his relics will be five leagues large
And ornamented with hundreds of different jewels.
$1039 “The guide of humans, Supuṣpa,
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Flowers.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend five leagues.
$1040 “Excellent Worship will be his father and Supreme Flower will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Flower will be his son and Flower his attendant.
Beautiful Mode will be the scholar
And Exalted Splendor the one of miracles. [174.b]
$1041 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Incomparable ones who soar like birds.#137
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1042 “And for the benefit of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years.
There will be ten billion fine stūpas
That shine with golden light.
$1043 “The thus-gone Ratnottama
Will be born in a place called Jewel Gathering.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend six leagues.
$1044 “Excellent Jewel will be his father and Glorious Ornament will be this victor’s mother.
Fearless will be his son and Trained his attendant.
Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Infinite Teacher the one of miracles.
$1045 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Worthy masters of meditation.
The lifespan of this victor will be ten thousand years,
$1046 “And after he has proceeded to cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-three thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa containing the relics of this victor,
Three leagues large and draped with beautiful garlands.
$1047 “The thus-gone protector, Sāgara,
Will be born in a place called Heart of Power.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend four leagues.
$1048 “Divine King will be his father and Ocean of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Ocean will be his son and Excellent Joy his attendant.
Like the King of Water will be the one of wisdom
And Attainer of the Unsurpassable the one of miracles.
$1049 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Whose minds are like brimming lakes.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$1050 “And the sacred Dharma of the discoverer of infinity
Will remain complete for eighty thousand years.
The stūpas of the one gone to peace
Will number two hundred twenty million.
$1051 “The thus-gone protector, Dharaṇīdhara,
Will be born in a place called Well Trained.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya, [175.a]
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1052 “Fine Excellence will be his father, and Adorned with the Qualities of Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Loving will be his son and Intelligent his attendant.
Lord of the Land will be the scholar
And Attainer of Nine Retentions the one of miracles.
$1053 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Incomparable, lotus-like beings.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1054 “And the sacred Dharma of truly delightful qualities
Will remain complete for seventeen thousand years.
The stūpa of this victor will measure one league
And be beautifully adorned with hundreds of flowers.
$1055 “The thus-gone Arthabuddhi
Will be born in a place called Meaningful Sound.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1056 “Excellent Hand will be his father and Brahmā Stūpa will be this victor’s mother.
Stūpa will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
Nectar of Intelligence will be the scholar
And Treasury of Certainty the one of miracles.
$1057 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
Mountain-like beings who are free from anger.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-two thousand years,
$1058 “And when the teacher has entered liberation
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighteen thousand years.
His relics will be abundant, and the entire earth
Will be covered by sixty million precious stūpas.
$1059 “The good and glorious Guṇagaṇa
Will be born in a place called Inferior Intelligence.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one league.
$1060 “Intelligent will be his father and Unattractive will be this victor’s mother.
Joy for the World will be his son and Star his attendant.
Even Mode will be the scholar
And Famed Illuminator the one of miracles.
$1061 “There will be one hundred and five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion,
And then another sixty-six congregations.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1062 “And for the sake of gods and humans the sacred Dharma will remain for a thousand years. [175.b]
The single stūpa containing the relics
Will measure ninety-eight leagues
And be adorned with nets of hundreds of jewels.
$1063 “The thus-gone Guṇagaṇa
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Qualities.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$1064 “Traverser will be his father and Endowed with Splendid Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Intelligent will be his son and Intelligent his attendant.
Abandoning Displeasure will be the scholar
And Cutting through the Net the one of miracles.
$1065 “There will be eleven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three billion,
Masters of meditation who are free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
$1066 “And this victor’s sacred Dharma will remain for a thousand years.
The relics of this victorious one
Will be contained in a single stūpa,
Half a league large and adorned with seventy thousand parasols.
$1067 “The thus-gone Ratnāgni#138
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Supreme Intelligence.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend sixty-two leagues.
$1068 “Lord of the Gathering will be his father and Lion Banner will be this victor’s mother.
Gatherer will be his son and Excellent Gathering his attendant.
Rising like a Mountain will be the one of insight
And Remaining Detached the one of miracles.
$1069 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred sixty million,
Irreversible ones who have attained retention.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$1070 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain for thirty-two thousand years.
The stūpas of the one who has gone beyond existence
Will number eighty-four thousand.
$1071 “The well-gone Lokāntara
Will be born in a place called Excellent Cultivation of Merit.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-six leagues.
$1072 “Excellent Steps will be his father and Delighting in the Meaning will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Meaning will be his son and Joy his attendant. [176.a]
Fearless Joy will be the scholar
And Truly Superior Fame the one of miracles.
$1073 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Of the highest and supreme.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
$1074 “And the sacred Dharma replete with qualities
Will remain for seventy-four thousand years.
The relics of the one free from the plagues will be abundant
And contained in seven hundred forty billion stūpas.
$1075 “The thus-gone Lokacandra
Will be born in a place called Possessor of the Moon.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1076 “Moon will be his father and Lovely Moon Countenance his mother.
Vitality will be his son and Excellent Flower his attendant.
Famed Illuminator will be the scholar
And Luminous Discipline the one of miracles.
$1077 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations
Of the true and supreme king of gatherings,
Each of them bringing together four billion.
His lifespan will be thirty-two thousand years,
$1078 “And the sacred Dharma will remain
For ninety-five thousand years.
The single stūpa containing the relics of the victorious one
Will measure seven leagues and be adorned with gold.
$1079 “The thus-gone Madhura­svara­rāja
Will be born in a place called Dharma View.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty leagues.
$1080 “Excellent Body will be his father and Excellent Glory will be this victor’s mother.
Lotus will be his son and Victorious Joy his attendant.
Essence of Qualities will be the scholar
And Superior Dharma the one of miracles.
$1081 “There will be four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred seventy million
Who have mastered the cultivation of mental peace.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1082 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has gone beyond entities
Will remain two hundred thousand years.
The relics of this victorious one will be infinitely abundant,
Residing in seven hundred thirty million stūpas.
$1083 “The thus-gone Brahmaketu[176.b]
Will be born in a place called Seen by Brahmā.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
$1084 “Excellent Brahmā will be his father and Brahmā Possessor will be this victor’s mother.
Brahmā will be his son and Excellent Brahmā his attendant.
Compassionate Concern will be the scholar
And Abiding by Love the one of miracles.
$1085 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred thirty million
Who are detached and free from dullness.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred thousand years,
$1086 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has attained nirvāṇa
Will remain complete for ninety thousand years.
The single stūpa with the relics of this victorious one
Will measure twelve leagues in height and be decorated with gold.
$1087 “The thus-gone Gaṇimukha
Will be born in a place called Imagination.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1088 “Excellent Moon will be his father and Equanimous Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Lotus will be his son and Tree his attendant.
Love with Qualities will be the scholar
And Highest Mind the one of miracles.
$1089 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Who are beyond remainder and resemble the wind.
The lifespan of humans will be eighteen thousand years,
$1090 “And when this guide has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for thirteen thousand years.
The precious stūpas with the relics of this victorious one
Will number one trillion one hundred billion.
$1091 “The accumulator of excellent qualities, Siṃhagati,
Will be born in a place called World of Highest Delight.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twice as far as Jambudvīpa.
$1092 “Excellent Accomplishment will be his father and Circular Movement will be this victor’s mother.
Concentration will be his son and Delightful his attendant.
Accomplishment of Yogic Discipline will be the scholar
And Accomplishment of the Supreme Roar the one of miracles.
$1093 “There will be eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering billions of worthy ones [177.a]
Who are all stainless like the currents of the Gaṅgā.
The lifespan of humans will be forty thousand years,
$1094 “And when this supreme human has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for sixty-six thousand years.
The stūpa containing his relics will measure one league
And be adorned with nets of hundreds of jewels.
$1095 “The buddha Ugradatta
Will be born in a place called Intense Austerities.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1096 “Fine Incense will be his father and Golden Light will be this victor’s mother.
Glorious will be his son and Extremely Glorious his attendant.
Mind of Qualities will be the scholar
And High Qualities the one of miracles.
$1097 “There will be five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred billion
Who abide firmly, like bolts.
His lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years,
$1098 “And for the benefit of the world his sacred Dharma
Will remain complete for nineteen thousand years.
The stūpas will number three billion
And be surrounded by heavenly parks.
$1099 “The holy being Dharmeśvara
Will be born in a place called Venerated with Prostrations.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-five leagues.
$1100 “Excellent Worship will be his father and Famed Gathering will be this victor’s mother.
Flower will be his son and Worship of Excellence his attendant.
Light Crest will be the scholar
And Crest of Light the one of miracles.
$1101 “There will be three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred billion
Supreme sons who have reached the level of no more training.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-one thousand years,
$1102 “And the sacred Dharma will remain
For eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Measuring three leagues and studded with numerous jewels.
$1103 “The thus-gone Tejasprabha
Will be born in a place called Worshiped and Venerated.
The family of the victor will be brahmin
And his light will extend six leagues.
$1104 “Excellent Crossing will be his father and Adorned with Qualities will be this victor’s mother. [177.b]
Expert will be his son and Luminous his attendant.
Severer of the Bonds of Existence will be the scholar
And Crusher of Existence the one of miracles.
$1105 “There will be one hundred consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering a full billion worthy ones who are endowed with merit and liberation
And have reached the level of no more training.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1106 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the stūpas, numbering three billion,
Will be exquisitely decorated, like the Palace of Victory.
$1107 “The thus-gone Mahāraśmi
Will be born in a place called Dharma Light.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
$1108 “Great Being will be his father and Equal Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Luminous will be his son and Endowed with Certainty his attendant.
Thorough Ascertainment will be the scholar
And Attainer of Certainty the one of miracles.
$1109 “There will be fourteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who are all at the level of a worthy one.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$1110 “And the sacred Dharma of this vanquisher of the hordes of the māras
Will remain for ninety-nine thousand years.
When this victorious teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will reside in a stūpa that is one hundred leagues large.
$1111 “The thus-gone Ratnayaśas will be born in a place called Jewel Crest. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend the breadth of a trichiliocosm. Lord of Beings will be his father. Supreme Glorious Jewel will be his mother. Splendor of a Thousand Qualities will be his son. Infinite Qualities will be his attendant. Gathering of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Beautiful Light Rays will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be infinitely many congregations, all of them consisting of irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three trillion six hundred billion years. [178.a] His relics will be abundant, and there will be three hundred thousand stūpas.
$1112 “The thus-gone Gaṇiprabhāsa will be born in a place called Ocean of Intelligence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ninety leagues. Supreme Excellence will be his father. Delightful Melody will be his mother. Playful Lion will be his son. Gathering of Qualities will be his attendant. Lamp of Fame will be foremost in terms of insight. King of Supreme Taste will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be three billion hearers, in the second there will be four billion, and in the third there will be five billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1113 “The thus-gone Anantayaśas will be born in a place called Delightful Melody. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend two leagues. Wealth God will be his father. Lady of the Stars will be his mother. Supreme Jewel will be his son. Endowed with Meritorious Wealth will be his attendant. Endowed with the Nature of Meditation will be foremost in terms of insight. Merit Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for five thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1114 “The thus-gone Amogharaśmi will be born in a place called Meaningful Steps. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Gift of Colors will be his father. Looking with Joy will be his mother. Universally Good will be his son. Joy for the World will be his attendant. King of Leaders will be foremost in terms of insight. Free from Māras will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations of worthy ones, [178.b] each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1115 “The thus-gone Ṛṣideva will be born in a place called Fully Blooming. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend two and a half leagues. Sage Friend will be his father. Abiding by the Position will be his mother. King of Supreme Fragrance will be his son. Perfectly Endowed will be his attendant. Blooming Flowers of Superknowledge will be foremost in terms of insight. Superior Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be two consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1116 “The thus-gone Janendra will be born in a place called Delighting People. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend far as the world with its four continents. Full Moon will be his father. White Star will be his mother. Mind without Delusion will be his son. Special Mind will be his attendant. Māra Crusher will be foremost in terms of insight. Abandoning Doubt will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be five consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1117 “The thus-gone Dṛḍhasaṅgha will be born in a place called Stable Intelligence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Excellence will be his father. Supreme Jewel will be his mother. Worshiped by Gods will be his son. Observing the World will be his attendant. Possessor of Fierce Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Abiding in Equality will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [179.a] There will be just a single congregation, gathering three hundred thousand worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1118 “The thus-gone Supakṣa will be born in a place called Jewel Facets. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Gem Radiance will be his father. Gift of Beauty will be his mother. Meaningful Joy will be his son. Meteor Wish will be his attendant. Superior Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Fame of the Worthy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-nine consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eleven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eleven thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1119 “The thus-gone Ketu will be born in a place called Supreme Crest. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twenty leagues. Supreme Immeasurability will be his father. Viewing Qualities will be his mother. Illuminator will be his son. Tamer of Rebirths will be his attendant. Undefiled Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Cessation Attained will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be four hundred million worthy ones, in the second there will be six hundred million, and in the third there will be one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant, and there will be eighty thousand stūpas.
$1120 “The thus-gone Kusumarāṣṭra will be born in a place called Adorned with Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Glorious Merit will be his father. [179.b]Flower Gift will be his mother. White Lotus will be his son. Flower will be his attendant. Tamer of Companions will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1121 “The thus-gone Dharmamati will be born in the city of Fine Petals. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven leagues. Brahmā Mind will be his father. Intentional Gift will be his mother. Happy Wealth will be his son. Extremely Virtuous will be his attendant. Moon Gift Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Gift of Peace will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one billion hearers, in the second there will be one hundred million, and in the third there will be three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-nine thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1122 “The thus-gone Anilavegagāmin will be born in a place called Thoroughly Abiding. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty-two thousand leagues. Mind without Discord will be his father. Liberation Faith will be his mother. Knot of Joy will be his son. Pain Extracting Flower will be his attendant. Mandārava Fragrance will be foremost in terms of insight. Sandalwood Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ten billion. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1123 “The thus-gone Sucittayaśas will be born in a place called Great Array. [180.a] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Splendor will be his father. Splendid will be his mother. Wind Mind will be his son. Equanimous Mind will be his attendant. Clear Gathering will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventeen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1124 “The thus-gone Dyutimat will be born in a place called Starlight. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Given by Lightning will be his father. Giver of Excellence will be his mother. Joyous Worship will be his son. Seeing the Meaning will be his attendant. Seeing the Truth will be foremost in terms of insight. Joyous Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering thirty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1125 “The thus-gone Marutskandha will be born in a place called Excellent Weapon. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight hundred leagues. God of Demigods will be his father. Nāga Light will be his mother. Supreme Leader will be his son. Superior Crest will be his attendant. Fame of the Nāga Master will be foremost in terms of insight. Jewel Giving will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one billion hearers, in the second there will be one hundred fifty million, and in the third there will be nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant. [180.b]
$1126 “The thus-gone Guṇagupta will be born in a place called Endowed with Qualities His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six leagues. Supreme Qualities will be his father. Glorious Qualities will be his mother. Precious Worship will be his son. True Joy will be his attendant. Excellent Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Highest will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1127 “The thus-gone Arthamati will be born in a place called Clear Dharma. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend forty-four thousand leagues. Flower King will be his father. Endowed with Fame will be his mother. Lotus Possessor will be his son. Excellent Birth will be his attendant. Nonabiding Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon of Sages will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering thirteen thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for nine thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1128 “The thus-gone Abhaya will be born in a place called Indomitable. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. God of Strength will be his father. Renowned Excellent Intention will be his mother. Fearless will be his son. Enduring Fearlessness will be his attendant. Unconquerable Banner will be foremost in terms of insight. Capable Gathering will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be nineteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa. [181.a]
$1129 “The thus-gone Sthitamitra will be born in a place called Enduring Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend two thousand leagues. Array Gift will be his father. Beautiful Joy will be his mother. Unmoving Mind will be his son. Equanimous Mind will be his attendant. Delightful Abiding will be foremost in terms of insight. Bright Movement will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1130 “The thus-gone Prabhāsthita­kalpa will be born in a place called Uncreated Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight leagues. Trained Being will be his father. Uninvadable will be his mother. Diverse Forces will be his son. Brahmā Melody will be his attendant. Detached Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Uncontrived Conduct will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eleven consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1131 “The thus-gone Maṇicaraṇa will be born in a place called Luminous Jewel. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twenty-two leagues. Famed Jewel will be his father. Superior Jewel will be his mother. Jewel Essence will be his son. Joyous Love will be his attendant. Radiant Attention will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventeen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant. [181.b]
$1132 “The thus-gone Mokṣatejas will be born in a place called Liberation. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten million leagues. Detached Mind will be his father. Joyous Mind will be his mother. King of the Mind will be his son. Excellent Sacrifice will be his attendant. Splendid Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Worthy of Worship will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for five thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1133 “The thus-gone Sundarapārśva will be born in a place called Indomitable. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three leagues. Gift of Excellent Sacrifice will be his father. Jewel Light will be his mother. Special Mind will be his son. Excellent Gift will be his attendant. Powerful Adherence will be foremost in terms of insight. Brightness Attained will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be nine hundred billion hearers; in the second there will be fifty billion; in the third, eighty billion; and in the fourth, one hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1134 “The thus-gone Subuddhi will be born in a place called Endowed with a Buddha. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten million leagues. Liberation Joy will be his father. Infinite Qualities will be his mother. Stūpa for Humanity will be his son. Endowed with View will be his attendant. Dexterous Being will be foremost in terms of insight. Crest of Purity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred sixty million. [182.a] His lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1135 “The thus-gone Samantadarśin will be born in a place called Unobscured. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twenty leagues. Vaiśākha Mind will be his father. Unperturbed Mind will be his mother. Giant Banner will be his son. Lion Strength will be his attendant. Dharma View will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Elixir will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1136 “The thus-gone Jñānavara will be born in a place called True Wisdom. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one league. Sublime Intelligence will be his father. Merit Gift will be his mother. Dharma Glory will be his son. Dharma Joy will be his attendant. Pure Merit will be foremost in terms of insight. Unshakable Fame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1137 “The thus-gone Brahmavāsa will be born in a place called Seen through Bliss. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Clear Mind will be his father. Brahmā Gift will be his mother. Master of Retention will be his son. Inexhaustible Sound will be his attendant. Expert Proclaimer will be foremost in terms of insight. Giver of Jewels will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seventy billion. [182.b] His lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1138 “The thus-gone Satyaruta will be born in a place called Constant Shooting Stars. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six hundred leagues. Ruler of Humans will be his father. Water Lily Blade will be his mother. Glory of the Truth will be his son. Sense Control will be his attendant. Powerful will be foremost in terms of insight. Great Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1139 “The thus-gone Subuddhi will be born in a place called Radiant Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight thousand six hundred leagues. Mind of Yogic Discipline will be his father. Holder of Shooting Stars will be his mother. Stūpa Worship will be his son. Wish for Awakening will be his attendant. Mode of Tremendous Stability will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy-five consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1140 “The thus-gone Baladatta will be born in a place called Irreproachable. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend fifty-six leagues. Famed for Invincibility will be his father. Endowed with Flowers will be his mother. Stūpa for Humanity will be his son. Flawless Persistence will be his attendant. Mind of Universal Retention will be foremost in terms of insight. Decisive Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy-two consecutive congregations, [183.a] each of them gathering three million three hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1141 “The thus-gone Siṃhagati will be born in a place called Supreme Melody. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight hundred leagues. Divine Wish will be his father. Beneficial Movement will be his mother. Supreme Deity will be his son. Dispeller of Suffering will be his attendant. Traverser of the Swamp will be foremost in terms of insight. Protection of the Worthy Ones will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1142 “The thus-gone Puṣpaketu will be born in a place called Fragrant Flower. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend two thousand leagues. Splendid Moon will be his father. Flower Light will be his mother. Flower Edge will be his son. Divine Flower will be his attendant. Gift of the Worthy Ones will be foremost in terms of insight. Teacher of Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1143 “The thus-gone Jñānākara will be born in a place called Source of Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Qualities Worthy of Worship will be his father. Leader Joy will be his mother. Excellent Light Rays will be his son. Possessor of Auspiciousness will be his attendant. Wisdom Crest will be foremost in terms of insight. Light Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [183.b] There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1144 “The thus-gone Puṣpadatta will be born in a place called Wish for Merit. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one league. Divine Excellence will be his father. Splendor of Precious Qualities will be his mother. View of Infinite Renown will be his son. Diligence Attainer will be his attendant. Discernment will be foremost in terms of insight. Fearless Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1145 “The thus-gone Guṇagarbha will be born in a place called Divine Messenger. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five leagues. Wealth Gift will be his father. Jewel Tree will be his mother. Flawless will be his son. Reasoning Mind will be his attendant. Crest of Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Moving with Recollection will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventeen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1146 “The thus-gone Yaśoratna will be born in a place called Master of Fame. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten thousand leagues. Virtuous Joy will be his father. Possessor of Religious Conduct will be his mother. Diverse Mind will be his son. Possessor of Threefold Knowledge will be his attendant. Holder of Knowledge Mantras will be foremost in terms of insight. Great Doctor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [184.a] There will be twenty-nine consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1147 “The thus-gone Adbhutayaśas will be born in a place called Divine Messenger. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Merit Joy will be his father. Endowed with Merit will be his mother. Great Merit will be his son. No Merit Deficiency will be his attendant. Dharma Banner will be foremost in terms of insight. Moving with the Gait of a Lion will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1148 “The thus-gone Anihata will be born in a place called Beautiful to See. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend fifty-five leagues. Luminosity will be his father. Infinite Light will be his mother. Mind of Acumen will be his son. Source of Learning will be his attendant. God of Eloquence will be foremost in terms of insight. Destroyer of Attacks will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1149 “The thus-gone Abhaya will be born in a place called Manifestation of Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twenty-seven thousand leagues. God of the Land will be his father. Brahmā Melody will be his mother. Expert Melody will be his son. Revered by Opponents will be his attendant. Holder of Shooting Stars will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Immeasurability will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [184.b] There will be thirty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering twenty-two billion. The extent of his lifespan will be five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1150 “The thus-gone Sūryaprabha will be born in a place called Splendid Merit. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty thousand leagues. Truth Gift will be his father. Precious Intelligence will be his mother. Gift of the Master of Birth will be his son. Gandharva Mind will be his attendant. Source of Learning will be foremost in terms of insight. Divine Dharma will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one hundred consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering seventy billion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nineteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1151 “The thus-gone Brahmagāmin will be born in a place called Unblemished Fame. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Powerful will be his father. Free from Pride and Infatuation will be his mother. Adorned with Marks will be his son. Untiring Mind will be his attendant. Expert Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Brahmā Melody will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-seven thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1152 “The thus-gone Vikrāntadeva will be born in a place called Approach. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Giver of All will be his father. Excellent Intelligence will be his mother. Wish for All will be his son. Fame will be his attendant. [185.a]Excellent Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Stainless Essence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one hundred consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1153 “The thus-gone Jñānapriya will be born in a place called Delightful Faith. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five leagues. Superior Faith will be his father. Worshiped by Gods will be his mother. Light of Worship will be his son. Worshiped by the World will be his attendant. Splendor of a Thousand Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Abiding Evenly will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-one consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering thirty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be nine thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1154 “The thus-gone Satyadeva will be born in a place called Worshiped by Gods. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will be infinite. Worthy of Worship will be his father. Wishing to Worship will be his mother. Brahmā Wheel will be his son. God of the World will be his attendant. Recipient of the World’s Worship will be foremost in terms of insight. Excellent Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one thousand consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six billion. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-eight thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1155 “The thus-gone Ratnagarbha will be born in a place called Adorned with All Excellent Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Moon of Humanity will be his father. Jewel Lamp will be his mother. Powerful Position will be his son. Increasing Qualities will be his attendant. Qualities Ascertained will be foremost in terms of insight. [185.b]Mind Free from Delusion will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty-nine consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering five hundred thirty million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty-one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1156 “The thus-gone Guṇakīrti will be born in a place called Jewel Lamp. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three leagues. Superior Deity will be his father. Extremely Beautiful will be his mother. Sage Gift will be his son. Joyous Relinquishment will be his attendant. Wisdom Being will be foremost in terms of insight. Great Master will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be sixty million hearers, in the second there will be seventy million, and in the third there will be eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection, contained in a stūpa of eight thousand six hundred leagues.
$1157 “The thus-gone Jñānaśrī will be born in a place called Heap of Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten thousand leagues. Stūpa for Humanity will be his father. Moon of Qualities will be his mother. Chariot of the Fortunate will be his son. Sun God will be his attendant. Supreme Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seven thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1158 “The thus-gone Asita will be born in a place called Infinite Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-four thousand leagues. God of the Water Gods will be his father. Moon Possessor will be his mother. [186.a] King of Supreme Virtue will be his son. Luminous Qualities will be his attendant. Joy for the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Delightful Presence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-three consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1159 “The thus-gone Dṛḍhavrata will be born in a place called Irreproachable. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Fragrant will be his father. Delightful Fragrance will be his mother. Universal Splendor will be his son. Distributed Wisdom will be his attendant. Holder of the Wisdom Treasury will be foremost in terms of insight. Sun of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1160 “The thus-gone Maruttejas will be born in a place called Splendor of the World. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Protected by Gods will be his father. God of Liberation will be his mother. Faith in the Gods will be his son. Free from the Suffering of the Three Worlds will be his attendant. Wisdom Summit will be foremost in terms of insight. Renown will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering two hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one billion years. His relics will be abundant.
$1161 “The thus-gone Brahmamuni will be born in a place called Famed Superior Intention. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Irreproachable will be his father. Sense Control will be his mother. Delighting in Calm Abiding will be his son. [186.b] Hand of Joy will be his attendant. Flower Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Beautiful Melody will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-four consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1162 “The thus-gone Śanairgāmin will be born in a place called Moving with Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven leagues. Heap of Qualities will be his father. Gathering of Qualities will be his mother. Luminous will be his son. Gathering Melody will be his attendant. Beautiful Fame of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Source of All Excellent Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1163 “The thus-gone Vratatapas will be born in a place called Great Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six leagues. Great Radiance will be his father. Attractive Splendor will be his mother. Undaunted Visage will be his son. Untiring Intellect will be his attendant. Gathering of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Unobscured Absence of Ignorance will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1164 “The thus-gone Arciskandha will be born in a place called Nāga Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as ten worlds of four continents. [187.a]Great Light will be his father. Lamp of the World will be his mother. Splendid Flower will be his son. Overpowering Splendor will be his attendant. Lotus Fragrance will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering twenty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1165 “The thus-gone Mahātejas will be born in a place called Extraordinary Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Stable Mode will be his father. Controller will be his mother. Luminosity will be his son. Gentle Melody will be his attendant. Aggregate of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seven thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1166 “The thus-gone Campaka will be born in a place called Endowed with Incense. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty leagues. Light of Merit will be his father. Delightful to See will be his mother. Lion Gaze will be his son. Elephant Gaze will be his attendant. Supreme King will be foremost in terms of insight. Victorious Merit will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one hundred million consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1167 “The thus-gone Toṣaṇa will be born in a place called Supreme Joy. [187.b] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as fifteen times the four continents. Light of Joy will be his father. Worthy of Worship will be his mother. Nāga Incense will be his son. Light of Discipline will be his attendant. Melody of True Speech will be foremost in terms of insight. Melody of Dharma Speech will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1168 “The thus-gone Sugaṇin will be born in a place called Clear Possession of Gatherings. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty thousand leagues. Sun Crest will be his father. Sun Essence will be his mother. Beautiful Mode will be his son. Joyful Child of the Wealth God will be his attendant. Joy of Awakening will be foremost in terms of insight. Source of Merit will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1169 “The thus-gone Indradhvaja will be born in a place called Jewel Banner. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Merit Banner will be his father. Banner of Excellent Qualities will be his mother. Dharma Mind will be his son. Mind Free from Delusion will be his attendant. Beautiful Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Gathering of Virtue will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seven hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1170 “The thus-gone Mahāpriya will be born in a place called Light of Thousands of Qualities. [188.a] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixteen leagues. Infinite Treasury will be his father. Fearless Wisdom will be his mother. Mind of Awakening will be his son. Firm Diligence will be his attendant. Fame Beyond Reproach will be foremost in terms of insight. Beautiful Wish will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-one consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1171 “The thus-gone Sumanā­puṣpa­prabha will be born in a place called Flower Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Highest Flower will be his father. Endowed with Flowers will be his mother. Flower Moon will be his son. Flower Crest will be his attendant. Flower of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. White Lotus Essence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one thousand consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering six hundred sixty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eight hundred million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eight hundred million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1172 “The thus-gone Gaṇiprabha will be born in a place called Leader Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend fourteen leagues. Luminous Qualities will be his father. Worshiped by Gods will be his mother. Luminous Merit will be his son. Luminous Fame will be his attendant. Luminous Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Luminous Superior will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ninety thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seven thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1173 “The thus-gone Creator#139 will be born in a place called Exceptionally Beautiful. [188.b] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty-two leagues. Powerful Load will be his father. Sun Possessor will be his mother. Master of Fame will be his son. Mountain Crest will be his attendant. Glorious Jewel will be foremost in terms of insight. Glorious Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be six hundred years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for six hundred years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1174 “The thus-gone Ojaṅgama will be born in a place called Delightful Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five leagues. Reveling Lion will be his father. Heap of Qualities will be his mother. Infinite Eye will be his son. Unrelenting Diligence will be his attendant. Heap of Diligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Possessor of Universal Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-one consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1175 “The thus-gone Suviniścitārtha will be born in a place called Definite Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety-nine leagues. Ultimate Qualities will be his father. Immeasurable Splendor will be his mother. Immeasurable Fame will be his son. Great Power will be his attendant. Friend of Wandering Beings will be foremost in terms of insight. Immeasurable Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eleven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eleven thousand years. [189.a] His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1176 “The thus-gone Vṛṣabha will be born in a place called Worshiped by Gods. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Supreme Ground will be his father. Stainless Intelligence will be his mother. Invincible Army will be his son. Universal Power will be his attendant. Worshiped by Gods will be foremost in terms of insight. Uncluttered Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seven hundred million consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1177 “The thus-gone Subāhu will be born in a place called Divine Stūpa. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty-two leagues. Excellent Friend will be his father. Stable Movement will be his mother. Supreme Wish will be his son. Nectar Proclaimer will be his attendant. Auspicious Rāhu will be foremost in terms of insight. The World’s Superior will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1178 “The thus-gone Mahāraśmi will be born in a place called Jewel Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Nectar Joy will be his father. Wish for Qualities will be his mother. Supreme Taste will be his son. Hundred Tastes will be his attendant. Mind of Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Unsullied Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eleven consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred ten million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-one thousand years. [189.b] His relics will be abundant.
$1179 “The thus-gone Āśādatta will be born in a place called Truly Superior Thought. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine thousand leagues. Seeing the Secret will be his father. Truly Superior Yogic Discipline will be his mother. Flawless Roar will be his son. Precious Melody will be his attendant. Virtuous Incense will be foremost in terms of insight. Great Tone will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twelve consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred seventy million. The extent of his lifespan will be seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1180 “The thus-gone Puṇyābha will be born in a place called Heap of Merit. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Merit Splendor will be his father. Merit Radiance will be his mother. Splendid Fame will be his son. Divine Fame will be his attendant. Sunlight will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three million. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1181 “The thus-gone Ratnaruta will be born in a place called Melody of Liberation. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten million leagues. Beryl Essence will be his father. Roar of Liberation will be his mother. Attainment of Nonabiding will be his son. Worshiped by Gods will be his attendant. Worshiped by the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Worshiped by Nāgas will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering fourteen thousand. [190.a] His lifespan will be sixty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1182 “The thus-gone Vajrasena will be born in a place called Indivisible. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six thousand leagues. Indivisible Joy will be his father. Vajra Intelligence will be his mother. Mind of Joy will be his son. Melody Gift will be his attendant. Nāga Flower will be foremost in terms of insight. Worshiped by the World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering two hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1183 “The thus-gone Samṛddha will be born in a place called Universal Wealth. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five thousand leagues. King of Wealth will be his father. Queen of Virtue will be his mother. Great King will be his son. King of Gods will be his attendant. Light of Worship will be foremost in terms of insight. Nothing Lacking will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seven consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1184 “The thus-gone Siṃhabala will be born in a place called Great Strength. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand leagues. Nāga Strength will be his father. Endowed with Fame will be his mother. Jewel Strength will be his son. Strength of Excellent Qualities will be his attendant. Strength of Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Fearless Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering five hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. [190.b] His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1185 “The thus-gone, stainless Netra, will be born in a place called Delightful to the Eye. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Even Eyes will be his father. Beautiful Eyes will be his mother. God of Nectar will be his son. Clear Focal Point will be his attendant. Stūpa of the Victorious Ones will be foremost in terms of insight. Inexhaustible Intellect will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering seventeen thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1186 “The thus-gone Kāśyapa will be born in a place called Excellent Land. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Divine Sage will be his father. Gift of Fearlessness will be his mother. Power of Knowledge will be his son. Universal Intellect will be his attendant. Unobscured Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Merit Summit will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering nine hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1187 “The thus-gone Prasannabuddhi will be born in a place called Luminous. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Clear will be his father. Luminous Qualities will be his mother. Faith in Liberation will be his son. Luminous Victor will be his attendant. Clear Speech will be foremost in terms of insight. Miraculous Display of Clarity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eight billion. The extent of his lifespan will be fourteen thousand years. [191.a] His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1188 “The thus-gone Jñānakrama will be born in a place called Splendidly Adorned. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Stable Power will be his father. Wisdom Attained will be his mother. Joyous Sight will be his son. Beautiful Joy will be his attendant. Bharata will be foremost in terms of insight. Radiant Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1189 “The thus-gone Ugratejas will be born in a place called Universal Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend forty leagues. Fierce Mountain will be his father. Splendid Flower will be his mother. Unmistaken Observation will be his son. Discernment will be his attendant. Royal Master of Retention will be foremost in terms of insight. Remaining Unperturbed will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be sixty thousand hearers; in the second there will be one hundred thousand; in the third, three hundred thousand; in the fourth, six hundred thousand; and in the fifth, eight hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will fifty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for fifty-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1190 “The thus-gone Mahāraśmi will be born in a place called Limitless Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy leagues. Jewel Lamp will be his father. Splendid Worship will be his mother. Divine Splendor will be his son. Splendor of the Best Hands will be his attendant. Splendor of the Three Realms will be foremost in terms of insight. Splendor of the Noble will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [191.b] There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1191 “The thus-gone Sūryaprabha will be born in a place called Illuminating Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend forty-two leagues. Famed Light will be his father. Immeasurable Eye will be his mother. Luminous Meteor will be his son. Sight of Light will be his attendant. Divine Eye will be foremost in terms of insight. Moonlight will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1192 “The thus-gone Vimalaprabha will be born in a place called Unshakable Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Divine Splendor will be his father. Body of Delight will be his mother. Impeccable Limbs will be his son. Flawless Body will be his attendant. Transcendence Attained will be foremost in terms of insight. Immeasurable Movement will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty-two thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1193 “The thus-gone Vibhaktatejas will be born in a place called Tremendous Detail. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixteen leagues. Glorious Splendor will be his father. Supreme Splendor will be his mother. Astrologer will be his son. Leader Fragrance will be his attendant. Virtuous Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. [192.a] Hand of Merit will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty-eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering thirty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one hundred and forty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1194 “The thus-gone Anuddhata will be born in a place called Perfection. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Indomitable will be his father. Distinctive Attainment will be his mother. Distinguished World will be his son. Unequaled will be his attendant. Distinguished World will be foremost in terms of insight. Distinguished will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1195 “The thus-gone Madhuvaktra will be born in a place called Singularly Delightful. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Instiller of Joy will be his father. Nectar Giver will be his mother. Unmistaken Array will be his son. Worshiped by the World will be his attendant. Holder of Shooting Stars will be foremost in terms of insight. Holder of Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty-nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-five thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1196 “The thus-gone Candraprabha will be born in a place called Stainless Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend forty leagues. Moon Crest will be his father. Moon Flower will be his mother. Moonlight will be his son. Excellent Moon will be his attendant. Nectar Moon will be foremost in terms of insight. [192.b] Divine Nectar will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering five billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1197 “The thus-gone Vidyuddatta will be born in a place called Sun Intelligence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Banner of Rulers will be his father. Divine Worship will be his mother. Sun Crest will be his son. Lamp of Honesty will be his attendant. Glorious Golden Light will be foremost in terms of insight. Meaningful Stage will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty-five consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1198 “The thus-gone Praśāntagāmin will be born in a place called Stable Mind. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty leagues. Even Mode will be his father. Heavenly will be his mother. Superior Wish will be his son. Worthy Wish will be his attendant. Reaching the Meaningful Stage will be foremost in terms of insight. Stable Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-one consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one million one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy-two thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1199 “The thus-gone Akṣobhya will be born in a place called Radiant. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Abiding by Love will be his father. Abiding by Compassion will be his mother. Unperturbed Mind will be his son. Even Mind will be his attendant. [193.a]Free from Delusion will be foremost in terms of insight. Truly Superior Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1200 “The thus-gone Arhatkīrti will be born in a place called Eye of the Thus-Gone. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as sixteen worlds of four continents. Worthy One will be his father. Noble Mother Cow will be his mother. Famed Freedom from Suffering will be his son. Clear Worthy One will be his attendant. Infinite Renown will be foremost in terms of insight. Great Acumen will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thirty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1201 “The thus-gone Guṇadharma will be born in a place called Endowed with Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend two hundred leagues. Qualities of Splendor will be his father. Endowed with Qualities will be his mother. Infinite Qualities will be his son. Splendor of Great Qualities will be his attendant. Infinite Splendid Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. King of the Qualities of Liberation will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-three consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventeen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1202 “The thus-gone Laḍitakṣetra will be born in a place called Great Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend as far as twenty worlds of four continents. [193.b]Jewel Light will be his father. Infinite will be his mother. Lamp of Insight will be his son. Clear Insight will be his attendant. Radiant Astrologer will be foremost in terms of insight. King of the Array will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty-nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1203 “The thus-gone Vyūharāja will be born in a place called Jewel Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy-eight leagues. Inconceivable Array will be his father. Perfect Splendor will be his mother. Great Array will be his son. Array of Liberation will be his attendant. Divine Sun will be foremost in terms of insight. Immutable Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-seven thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1204 “The thus-gone Abhyudgata will be born in a place called Divine Mound. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Lord of Wandering Beings will be his father. Supreme Radiance will be his mother. Without Conceit will be his son. Serene Faculties will be his attendant. Joyous Child of the Wealth God will be foremost in terms of insight. Merit Wish will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations, each of them gathering two hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-nine thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1205 “The thus-gone Hutārci will be born in a place called Brahmā Crest. [194.a] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy leagues. Sage Intelligence will be his father. Liberated Mind will be his mother. Free from Doubt will be his son. Abiding by the Training will be his attendant. Heroic Action will be foremost in terms of insight. Ocean Crest will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-five consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1206 “The thus-gone Padmaśrī will be born in a place called Endowed with Lotuses. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Flower Gift will be his father. Lotus Eye will be his mother. Flower King will be his son. Divine Flower will be his attendant. God of Demigods will be foremost in terms of insight. Leader of Sentient Beings will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-seven consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-nine thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1207 “The thus-gone Ratnavyūha will be born in a place called Divine Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend as far as thirty worlds of four continents. Jewel Light will be his father. Clear Intelligence will be his mother. Great Clarity will be his son. Great Array will be his attendant. Dharma Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Liberation Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy-five consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred seventy million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nineteen thousand years. [194.b] His relics will be abundant.
$1208 “The thus-gone Subhadra will be born in a place called Doing Good. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Divine Excellence will be his father. Superior Excellence will be his mother. Glorious Excellence will be his son. Heap of Jewels will be his attendant. Infinite Excellence will be foremost in terms of insight. Excellent Weapon will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty-nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering five million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nine thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1209 “The thus-gone Ratnottama will be born in a place called Great Jewel. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixteen leagues. Supreme Boy will be his father. Jewel Crest will be his mother. Jewel Ocean will be his son. Source of Jewels will be his attendant. Array of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Strength of Awakening will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1210 “The thus-gone Sumedhas will be born in a place called Great Mountain. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seventy-three leagues. Jewel Mountain will be his father. Great Jewel will be his mother. Mass of Nectar will be his son. Piled Virtues will be his attendant. Shining Mountain will be foremost in terms of insight. Remaining Unimpeded will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. [195.a] His relics will be abundant.
$1211 “The thus-gone Amitābha#140 will be born in a place called Immeasurable Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will be infinite. Meaningful Mind will be his father. Great Force will be his mother. Superior Fame will be his son. Serene Intelligence will be his attendant. Aspiration and Retention will be foremost in terms of insight. Constant Miracles will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1212 “The victorious Samudradatta
Will be born in a place called Infinite Ocean.
The family of this immaculate one will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend three thousand leagues.
$1213 “Lord of Learning will be his father, and Gathering of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Sight will be his son and Fierce his attendant.
Ten Stūpas will be the scholar
And Ocean Mind the one of miracles.
$1214 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who are unshakable, like the summits of mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1215 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has gone beyond entities
Will remain for ten billion years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the fine stūpas will number nine hundred sixty million.
$1216 “The thus-gone Brahmaketu
Will be born in a place called Lamp of Wisdom.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1217 “Excellent Brahmā will be his father, and Supreme Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
Stūpa Endowed with Gathering will be the scholar
And Brahmā View the one of miracles.
$1218 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thirty million
Meditators who have attained the eight liberations. [195.b]
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1219 “And this thus-gone one’s sacred Dharma
Will also remain for seventy-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the fine stūpas will number three billion.
$1220 “The thus-gone Somacchattra
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Radiant Light.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$1221 “Mindful will be his father, and High Tone will be this victor’s mother.
Rāhu Holder will be his son and Class Possessor his attendant.
Wisdom Joy will be the scholar
And Drier of Craving the one of miracles.
$1222 “There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Meditators who are free from deceit and the plagues.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1223 “And when this teacher has proceeded to peace
His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be contained in a single stūpa
Measuring five leagues and adorned with gold.
$1224 “The protector of the world, Arciṣmat,
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Excellent Statements.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1225 “Shining will be his father, and Crest of Light will be this victor’s mother.
Auspicious will be his son and Lord of the Gathering his attendant.
Famed Excellence will be the scholar
And Famed for Fearlessness the one of miracles.
$1226 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Consisting exclusively of those who have perfected correct knowledge
And attained the fruition of liberation beyond training.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
$1227 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone beyond entities
Will remain for thirty-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Contained in thirty-two billion stūpas.
$1228 “The thus-gone Vimalarāja
Will be born in a place called Light of Merit.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
$1229 “Excellent Glory will be his father, and Nectar Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Lion Mode will be his son and Divine Endowment his attendant. [196.a]
Source of Qualities will be the one of great insight
And Wisdom of the View the one of miracles.
$1230 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Sages who are at the level of a worthy one.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$1231 “And for the benefit of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
The stūpa of this victor will measure ten leagues
And be adorned with a thousand jewel banners.
$1232 “The thus-gone Jñānakīrti
Will be born in a place called Light of Fame.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1233 “Free from Suffering will be his father, and Divine Stūpa will be this victor’s mother.
Knowledgeable will be his son and Renowned his attendant.
Viewing the Positions will be the scholar
And Māra Crusher the one of miracles.
$1234 “There will be fifteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred fifty million
Who have achieved abiding within the eight liberations.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1235 “And the sacred Dharma of this supreme human attainer of absorption
Will remain for seven hundred sixty million years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the stūpas will number three hundred sixty billion.
$1236 “The supreme human, Saṃjaya,
Will be born in a place called Light of Truth.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1237 “Excellent Hands will be his father, and Ocean of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Possessor of Truth will be his son and Excellent Truth his attendant.
Delighting the Noble will be the scholar
And Excellent Supreme Hand the one of miracles.
$1238 “There will be two consecutive congregations,
Both of them gathering one hundred thousand
Who are free from attachment, like the wind in the sky.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
$1239 “And the sacred Dharma of this immutable one
Will remain for fourteen thousand years.
There will be a single relic of this victor
Contained in a stūpa five leagues large and adorned with golden canopies. [196.b]
$1240 “The buddha Guṇaprabha
Will be born in a place called Ocean of All Qualities.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1241 “Supreme Excellence will be his father, and Clear Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Gathering of Qualities will be his son and Luminous Qualities his attendant.
Adorned with Qualities will be the scholar
And Infinite Miraculous Qualities the one of miracles.
$1242 “There will be twelve consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Who have purified their minds and become free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty thousand years,
$1243 “And the sacred Dharma of this granter of the gift of sight
Will remain for twenty thousand years.
There will be a single relic of this victor
Contained in a stūpa eight leagues large and made entirely of jewels.
$1244 “The victorious Vighuṣṭaśabda
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Fame.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1245 “Famed Wealth will be his father, and Famed Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Fame will be his son and Divine Excellence his attendant.
Divine Melody will be the scholar
And Famed Nāga the one of miracles.
$1246 “There will be three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who are unshakable like majestic mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be eighteen thousand years,
$1247 “And after the one of infinite fame has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thousands of years.
The stūpa of this victor will be three leagues large
And made of the seven precious substances.
$1248 “The thus-gone one Pūrṇacandra
Will be born in a place called Radiant Crest.
This victor will be of kṣatriya family,
And his light will extend two leagues.
$1249 “Ruler of Humans will be his father, and Fame Gift will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Birth will be his son and Radiant his attendant.
Possessor of Rāhu’s Splendor will be the scholar
And Fearless Attack the one of miracles.
$1250 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Who have relinquished anger and, as it were, cut through the poisonous roots. [197.a]
The lifespan of humans will be fifty thousand years,
$1251 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of thoroughly trained mind
Will remain for thirty-three thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the fine stūpas will number seven hundred sixty million.
$1252 “The buddha Padmaraśmi
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Flowers.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$1253 “Excellent Lotus will be his father, and Pure Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Lotus will be his son and Reasoning Mind his attendant.
Flower Joy will be the scholar
And Blooming Flower of Wisdom the one of miracles.
$1254 “There will be four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six billion
Worthy meditators possessing complete faculties.
The lifespan of humans will be seventeen thousand years,
$1255 “And the sacred Dharma will remain
For ninety-five thousand years.
The single relic of this victor will reside
In a pearl-studded stūpa, sixteen leagues large.
$1256 “The guide Suvrata
Will be born in a place called Certain Wisdom.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1257 “Purity will be his father, and Light of Learning will be this victor’s mother.
Possessor of Beauty will be his son and Tremendous Beauty his attendant.
Worshiped by Beings will be the scholar
And Unimpeded Teacher the one of miracles.
$1258 “There will be nine consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Lotus-like beings who are free from all of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
$1259 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for eighty-nine thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear eight hundred billion stūpas.
$1260 “The thus-gone one Pradīparāja
Will be born in a place called Divine Light.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$1261 “Excellent Birth will be his father, and Endowed with Flowers will be this victor’s mother.
Star will be his son and Auspicious Star his attendant.
Ocean of Light will be the scholar
And Immutable Abiding the one of miracles. [197.b]
$1262 “There will be sixteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred thirty billion
Selfless worthy ones free from defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
$1263 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to cessation
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa of this victor,
Three leagues large and decorated with nets of gold.
$1264 “The thus-gone Vidyutketu
Will be born in a place called Constant Sight.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1265 “Excellent Doctor will be his father, and Lightning Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Indomitable will be his son and Thoroughly Trained his attendant.
Jewel Holder will be the one of intelligence
And Infinite Light the one of miracles.
$1266 “There will be sixty-eight consecutive congregations
Consisting exclusively of worthy recipients of worship
Who abide in nirvāṇa.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-seven thousand years,
$1267 “And the sacred Dharma will remain in the realm of humans
For twenty-three thousand years.
There will be a single relic of this victor,
And the stūpa will be one league large and decorated with banners.
$1268 “The thus-gone Raśmirāja
Will be born in a place called Delighting in Excellence.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty million leagues.
$1269 “Excellent Radiance will be his father, and Luminous Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Radiance Gift will be his son and Divine Excellence his attendant.
Illuminating Light will be the scholar
And Infinite Lamp the one of miracles.
$1270 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eighty billion
Worthy ones who have purified materiality.
The lifespan of humans will be eight million years,
$1271 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the trichiliocosm will be filled with fine stūpas.
$1272 “The thus-gone Jyotiṣka
Will be born in a place called Golden Splendor.
His family will be brahmin, [198.a]
And his light will extend eighty thousand leagues.
$1273 “Conscientious will be his father, and Joyous Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Qualities will be his son and Well Concealed his attendant.
Concealed Faculties will be the scholar
And Fearless Meditator the one of miracles.
$1274 “There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred billion
Who are all endowed with fearless wisdom.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred thousand years,
$1275 “And for the benefit of the world the sacred Dharma
Will remain for eleven thousand years.
The six-league-tall stūpa will be adorned with parasols
And draped with nets of pearl and beryl.
$1276 “The thus-gone Saṃpannakīrti
Will be born in a place called Famed Intelligence.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-two thousand leagues.
$1277 “Extremely Famed will be his father, and Famed in Existence will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Worship will be his son and Excellent Worship his attendant.
Source of Fame will be the scholar
And Famed Certainty the one of miracles.
$1278 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million
Who have brought defilements to exhaustion and are beyond rebirth.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-three thousand years,
$1279 “And when this teacher has accomplished exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-two thousand years.
His relics will be abundant, and there will be ten billion stūpas
Adorned with gold and jewels.
$1280 “The thus-gone Padmagarbha
Will be born in a place called Gold Essence.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend fifty-four leagues.
$1281 “Essence of Goodness will be his father, and Beryl Essence will be this victor’s mother.
Golden Light will be his son and Lion his attendant.
Jewel Tree will be the scholar
And Jewel Mind the one of miracles.
$1282 “There will be twenty-eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Selfless ones who have brought the defilements to exhaustion.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1283 “And when this teacher has relinquished existence
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-eight thousand years. [198.b]
The stūpas of this knower of the world
Will number seventy billion.
$1284 “The thus-gone Puṣya
Will be born in a place called Punarvasu.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1285 “Star will be his father, and Star Lady will be this victor’s mother.
Tamer of Enemies will be his son and Peace his attendant.
Ocean of Peace will be the scholar
And Fearless Mind the one of miracles.
$1286 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred billion
Who have gone beyond by means of the supreme vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-nine thousand years,
$1287 “And for the sake of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
There will be a single relic and a single stūpa,
Seven leagues large and adorned with gold.
$1288 “The well-gone Cārulocana
Will be born in a place called Delightful and Beautiful to See.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1289 “Excellent Eye will be his father, and Lovely Eye will be this victor’s mother.
Instiller of Joy will be his son and Fine Eye his attendant.
Abiding Mind will be the scholar
And Flawless Body the one of miracles.
$1290 “There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Who are immovable, like mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be seventeen thousand years,
$1291 “And when this victor has reached cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for a thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be ten billion stūpas.
$1292 “The thus-gone Anāvilārtha
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Jewels.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-three leagues.
$1293 “Excellent Form will be his father, and Equal Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Endowed with Light his attendant.
Master of Wandering Beings will be the scholar
And Mind Instilling Faith the one of miracles.
$1294 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred fifty million
Who are free from craving and ignorance. [199.a]
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1295 “And the sacred Dharma of this knower of the world
Will remain for thirty-five thousand years.
There will be ninety-two thousand fine stūpas
Studded with fine banners.
$1296 “The thus-gone Ugrasena
Will be born in a place called Fierce.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1297 “Land of Excellence will be his father, and Not Inferior will be this victor’s mother.
Treasury Hair will be his son and Accomplished his attendant.
Perfect Qualities will be the scholar
And Dharma Ascertainment the one of miracles.
$1298 “There will be seven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Who resemble wish-fulfilling jewels.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
$1299 “And after this teacher has gone to cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for ninety thousand years.
The stūpa of this victor will be three leagues large
And ablaze with fire-like splendor.
$1300 “The thus-gone Puṇyatejas
Will be born in a place called Merit Ornament.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1301 “Excellent Crest will be his father, and Intelligence Crest will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Excellent Birth his attendant.
One Hundred Strengths will be the scholar
And Doubt Dispeller the one of miracles.
$1302 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Consisting exclusively of worthy ones
Who have achieved the qualities of noble beings and gone beyond existence.
The lifespan of humans will be fifty-six thousand years,
$1303 “And the sacred Dharma of this immaculate one
Will remain for ten million years.
The stūpa of this victor will be three leagues large
And adorned with thousands of supreme golden banners.
$1304 “The well-gone Vikrama
Will be born in a place called Victorious Splendor.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend six leagues. [199.b]
$1305 “Tremendous Beauty will be his father, and Beautiful Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with the Mode will be his son and Divine Excellence his attendant.
Acumen Holder will be the scholar
And Guide of Generations the one of miracles.
$1306 “There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
Who are all free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1307 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for two thousand years.
There will be a single relic, and the stūpa of this victor
Will be five leagues large and made of gold.
$1308 “The protector Asaṅgamati
Will be born in a place called Hard to Subdue by the World.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1309 “Hard to Tame will be his father, and Famed Stūpa will be this victor’s mother.
Sacrifice Gift will be his son and Excellent Sacrifice his attendant.
Fondness for Questioners will be the scholar
And Supreme King the one of miracles.
$1310 “There will be eleven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
Who have purified their bodies and are immovable like mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1311 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of humanity
Will remain for nine thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And ablaze with the light of hundreds of thousands of jewels.
$1312 “The thus-gone Rāhudeva
Will be born in a place called Worshiped by the Water God.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-two leagues.
$1313 “Divine Excellence will be his father, and Ruler of Demigods will be this victor’s mother.
Jewel will be his son and Excellent Jewel his attendant.
Joyous Worship will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith in the Spiritual Training of Speech the one of miracles.
$1314 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six billion
Who have dispelled the three stains.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
$1315 “And the sacred Dharma of this attainer of supreme qualities
Will remain for seventy-four thousand years.
The single stūpa with the relics of this victor [200.a]
Will be sixteen leagues large and decorated with gold.
$1316 “The thus-gone Jñānarāśi
Will be born in a place called Dharma Mountain.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-one leagues.
$1317 “Excellent Sacrifice will be his father, and Supreme Wisdom will be this victor’s mother.
Knowledge Gift will be his son and Excellent Knowledge his attendant.
Source of Jewels will be the scholar
And Knowledgeable Worship the one of miracles.
$1318 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred million
Who have gone to the summit of existence by means of the supreme vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1319 “And the sacred Dharma of this perfect sage
Will remain for sixty-three thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And things resulting from merit will be decorated with gold.
$1320 “The protector of the world, Sārathi,
Will be born in a place called Leader Stūpa.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1321 “Supreme Roar will be his father, and Most Supreme will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Gift will be his son and Lotus his attendant.
Mandārava Fragrance will be the one of intelligence
And Fragrance of Excellent Worship the one of miracles.
$1322 “There will be sixteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred sixty million
Selfless worthy ones who have abandoned rigidity.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1323 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain for ninety thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
And the stūpas will number nine hundred ninety million.
$1324 “The thus-gone Janendrakalpa
Will be born in a place called Royal Banner.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1325 “Victorious Lord will be his father, and Supreme Lady will be this victor’s mother.
Powerful will be his son and Excellent Power his attendant.
Lamp of Great Power will be the one of intelligence
And Fearless Lord the one of miracles.
$1326 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Whose minds have relinquished rigidity and purified defilement, and who are free from the māras. [200.b]
The lifespan of humans will be seventy thousand years,
$1327 “And for the benefit of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for a thousand years.
When this victor has attained nirvāṇa
There will be a single stūpa, five leagues large, for his relics.
$1328 “The buddha Puṣpaketu
Will be born in a place called Delighting in Flowers.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-six leagues.
$1329 “Excellent Flower will be his father, and Endowed with Flowers will be this victor’s mother.
Blooming Flower will be his son and Excellent Flower his attendant.
Splendid Great Flower will be the one of intelligence
And Flower Lamp the one of miracles.
$1330 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
Who have all equally given up rigidity and severed the poisonous roots.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$1331 “And when this teacher has gone to cessation
His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-nine thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa, measuring one league,
Which will be decorated with nets of gold and parasols.
$1332 “The protector of the world, Rāhula,
Will be born in a place called Jewel Light.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-one leagues.
$1333 “Excellent Discipline will be his father, and Endowed with Discipline will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Discipline will be his son and Excellent Worship his attendant.
Cutting through Existence will be the one of intelligence
And Stable Mode the one of miracles.
$1334 “There will be twenty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering a complete group
Of two hundred million sages.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1335 “And the sacred Dharma of this victor
Will remain for seven hundred thirty billion years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Impossible to count by any wandering being.
$1336 “The thus-gone Mahauṣadhi
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Medicine.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1337 “Excellent Treasury will be his father, and Bright Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Wish for Liberation will be his son and Complete Liberation his attendant.
Certain Qualities will be the scholar [201.a]
And Abiding within Dharma the one of miracles.
$1338 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering a full group
Of two hundred forty million worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty thousand years,
$1339 “And when this teacher has gone to cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-six thousand years.
When this expert on sentient beings has attained nirvāṇa
There will be a single stūpa for his relics that will measure two leagues.
$1340 “The immaculate Nakṣatrarāja
Will be born in a place called Moonlight.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
$1341 “Excellent Moon will be his father, and Supreme Moon will be this victor’s mother.
Moon Gift will be his son and Good Moon his attendant.
Great Radiance will be the scholar
And Splendid Light the one of miracles.
$1342 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million worthy ones,
And then again one billion.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
$1343 “And when this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-six years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
As well as worshiped and venerated throughout the three realms.
$1344 “The thus-gone Vaidyarāja
Will be born in a place called Universal Abiding.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
$1345 “Land of Excellence will be his father, and Possessor of Brightness will be this victor’s mother.
Divine Excellence will be his son and Endowed with the Mode his attendant.
Joyous will be the scholar
And Inexhaustible Intellect the one of miracles.
$1346 “When all the worthy ones gather
There will be nine hundred twenty million.
At that time the lifespan of humans
Will be seventy thousand years,
$1347 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has entered liberation
Will remain for eighteen thousand years.
When this giver of sight has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be contained in a stūpa measuring three leagues.
$1348 “The thus-gone Puṇyahastin
Will be born in a place called Precious Elephant. [201.b]
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-four leagues.
$1349 “Great Being will be his father, and Possessor of Jewels will be this victor’s mother.
Proud will be his son and Intelligent his attendant.
Gathering of Jewels will be the scholar
And Seeing All Wealth the one of miracles.
$1350 “There will be five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million.
His lifespan will reach
A full fifteen thousand years,
$1351 “And the sacred Dharma of this majestic leader
Will remain for seventy-two thousand years.
When this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be contained in a stūpa measuring one league.
$1352 “The thus-gone Chedana#141
Will be born in a place called Seen Clearly.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
$1353 “Saga will be his father, and Deer Lady will be this victor’s mother.
Purifier will be his son and Well Purified his attendant.
Sage Realization will be the scholar
And Wisdom of Fine Realization the one of miracles.
$1354 “There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million,
Along with ten billion worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1355 “And the sacred Dharma of this knower of the three times
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
When this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant.
$1356 “The well-gone Vighuṣṭarāja
Will be born in a place called Famed Purity.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend eight leagues.
$1357 “Faith will be his father, and Famed Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Fame will be his son and Fame his attendant.
Famed Qualities will be the scholar
And Highly Accomplished Miraculous Display the one of miracles.
$1358 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
Liberated ones who do not form views based on grasping the aggregates.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
$1359 “And the sacred Dharma of this incomparable one [202.a]
Will also remain for seventy-four thousand years.
The relics of the victor will be abundant,
Receiving the worship of gods and supreme humans.
$1360 “The thus-gone Sūryaraśmi
Will be born in a place called Radiant Crest.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-nine leagues.
$1361 “Divine Excellence will be his father, and Golden Light will be this victor’s mother.
Light Gift will be his son and Excellent Hand his attendant.
Endowed with Light will be one intelligence
And Lamp Light#142 the one of miracles.
$1362 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Worthy ones without attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be twelve thousand years,
$1363 “And when this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa,
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
The relics of the victor will be contained in a stūpa
Thirty leagues large and adorned with gold.
$1364 “The thus-gone Dharmakośa
Will be born in a place called Light of Wisdom.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1365 “Excellent Abandonment will be his father, and Supreme Treasury will be this victor’s mother.
Prince will be his son and Sage his attendant.
Powerful Sage will be the scholar
And Fearless Wisdom the one of miracles.
$1366 “There will be sixteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Worthy ones who have purified the body and are free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
$1367 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The single relic of this victor will be contained in a stūpa
Five leagues large and beautifully decorated.
$1368 “The protector of the world Sumati
Will be born in a place called Array of Intelligence.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$1369 “Intelligent will be his father, and Great Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Venerated by All will be his son and Lord of Intelligence his attendant.
Stūpa of Qualities will be the scholar
And Clear Position the one of miracles.
$1370 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million [202.b]
Unattached meditators who are free from the plagues.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty thousand years,
$1371 “And when this victor has gone to the immutable
His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear sixteen billion stūpas.
$1372 “The protector Guṇendrakalpa
Will be born in a place called Banner of the Highest Lord.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eighteen leagues.
$1373 “Lord will be his father, and Intelligence of the Lord of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Mastery will be his son and Lord of the Gathering his attendant.
Gathering of Qualities will be the one of intelligence
And Gathering of All Qualities the one of miracles.
$1374 “There will be eight consecutive congregations,
All of them gathering exclusively victor-offspring who have purified the body,
Worthy ones free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
$1375 “And when this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty years.
The single relic of this victor will be contained in a stūpa
Draped with jewel nets and studded with banners.
$1376 “The thus-gone Vajrasena
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Jewels.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$1377 “Excellent Force will be his father, and Truly Stable will be this victor’s mother.
Vajra Gift will be his son and Luminous his attendant.
Unstained by Attacks will be the one of intelligence
And King of Medicine the one of miracles.
$1378 “There will be twenty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thirty million
Who have become extremely gentle by means of the absence of marks.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-eight thousand years,
$1379 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher
Will also remain for twenty-eight thousand years.
After this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant, filling the realms.
$1380 “The thus-gone Prajñākūṭa
Will be born in a place called Summit of Insight.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1381 “Excellent Insight will be his father, and Supreme Insight will be this victor’s mother. [203.a]
Insight Gift will be his son and Excellent Insight his attendant.
Source of Insight will be the scholar
And Purified Insight the one of miracles.
$1382 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Worthy ones who have merged with liberation.
The lifespan of humans will be forty thousand years,
$1383 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for fifteen thousand years.
The single relic of this victor will be contained in a stūpa
That is five leagues tall.
$1384 “The protector of the world, Susthita,
Will be born in a place called Excellent Abiding.
This victor will be of kṣatriya family,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1385 “Meaningful Abiding will be his father, and Endowed with Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Power will be his son and Mind Power his attendant.
Virtuous Abiding will be the scholar
And Infinite Absence of Ignorance the one of miracles.
$1386 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering
Nine billion worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be eleven thousand years,
$1387 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for seventy-eight thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And surrounded by supreme golden banners.
$1388 “The thus-gone Cīrṇabuddhi
Will be born in a place called Excellent Accumulation of Merit.
This victor will be of kṣatriya family,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1389 “Endowed with Light will be his father, and Possessor of Truth will be this victor’s mother.
Intelligence will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
Great Radiance will be the scholar
And Great Joy the one of miracles.
$1390 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred million
Who cut through the ties of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1391 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Decorated with divine substances and supreme banners. [203.b]
$1392 “The thus-gone Brahmaghoṣa
Will be born in a place called Beautiful Tones.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-five leagues.
$1393 “Excellent Brahmā will be his father, and Brahmā Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Brahmā Gift will be his son and Yogic Discipline his attendant.
Eye of Compassion will be the scholar
And Brahmā Lord Great Being the one of miracles.
$1394 “There will be five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Whose minds have pacified attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
$1395 “And the sacred Dharma of this victor
Will remain for twenty-seven thousand years.
The stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will be thirty leagues large.
$1396 “The thus-gone Guṇottama
Will be born in a place called Adorned with the Supreme.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twelve leagues.
$1397 “Supreme Hand will be his father, and Nāga Light will be this victor’s mother.
Fifth will be his son and Giving Up Sleep his attendant.
Song will be the scholar
And Protector Sight the one of miracles.
$1398 “There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them bringing together
A gathering of two hundred twenty million.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1399 “And after this incomparable victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years.
For the benefit of the world the relics of this victor
Will increase in abundance.
$1400 “The thus-gone Garjitasvara
Will be born in a place called Melody of Fame.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1401 “Famed will be his father, and Supreme Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Beautiful Voice will be his son and Reasoning Mind his attendant.
Beautiful Melody will be the scholar
And Fierce Voice the one of miracles.
$1402 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred million
Whose minds have gone beyond the three worlds. [204.a]
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
$1403 “And the sacred Dharma will remain
For seventeen thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be contained
In a stūpa five leagues large and adorned with gold.
$1404 “The thus-gone Abhijñāketu
Will be born in a place called Radiant Crest.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend four leagues.
$1405 “Superknowledge will be his father, and Qualities of Superknowledge will be this immaculate one’s mother.
Superknowledge will be his son and Excellent Miraculous Ability his attendant.
Aspiration will be the one of intelligence
And Cultivating the Scriptures the one of miracles.
$1406 “There will be eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Who have gone to the stage of no more training.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
$1407 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be contained
In a stūpa four leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
$1408 “The thus-gone Ketuprabha
Will be born in a place called Heap of Merit.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1409 “Excellent Heap will be his father, and Flower of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Heap will be his son and Best of Mountains his attendant.
Adorned with Qualities will be the scholar
And Merging with Awakening the one of miracles.
$1410 “There will be twenty-five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred million
Who all have attained liberation.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-three thousand years,
$1411 “And his sacred Dharma will remain
For twenty-two thousand years.
For the benefit of the world
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$1412 “The thus-gone Kṣema
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Virtue.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend three thousand leagues.
$1413 “Extremely Virtuous will be his father, and Supreme Virtue will be this immaculate one’s mother.
Virtue will be his son and Virtue Gift his attendant.
Worshiped by the World will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith in the World the one of miracles. [204.b]
$1414 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thousand
Who have become irreversible in their attainment of buddha qualities.
The lifespan of humans will be seven hundred sixty million years,
$1415 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite fame
Will remain nine hundred twenty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling all of the three realms.
$1416 “The protector of the world Brahmā
Will be born in a place called Brahmā in Joy and Delight.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
$1417 “Brahmā Lord will be his father, and Brahmā Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Beautiful Voice will be his son and Sacred Dharma his attendant.
Brahmā Friend will be the scholar
And Brahmā View the one of miracles.
$1418 “There will be a single congregation,
Gathering innumerably many millions
Of worthy ones who have all conquered the demon of defilement.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
$1419 “And after this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one day.
When this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be contained in a stūpa measuring seven leagues.
$1420 “The protector of the world, the supreme being Puṃgava,
Will be born in a place called Supreme Beauty.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1421 “Royal Tree will be his father, and Tree of Pride will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme will be his son and Supreme Excellence his attendant.
Dharma Supremacy will be the scholar
And Clear Abiding the one of miracles.
$1422 “There will be twenty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine billion
Worthy ones who have brought the stains to exhaustion.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty thousand years,
$1423 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite fame
Will remain twenty thousand years.
The single relic of this victor
Will be contained in a stūpa six leagues large. [205.a]
$1424 “The thus-gone Laḍitanetra
Will be born in a place called Delightful to Behold.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ninety-nine leagues.
$1425 “Possessor of Beauty will be his father, and Beauty Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Eye will be his son and Endowed with Eyes his attendant.
Beautiful Light will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith in the World the one of miracles.
$1426 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
Who abide in the joy of supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1427 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa dedicated to nirvāṇa
Draped with nets of hundreds of jewels.
$1428 “The thus-gone Nāgadatta
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Nāgas.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1429 “Meaningful Abiding will be his father, and Endowed with Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Power will be his son and Mind Power his attendant.
Virtuous Abiding will be the scholar
And Infinite Absence of Ignorance the one of miracles.
$1430 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them bringing together
A gathering of nine billion worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be eleven thousand years,
$1431 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has attained parinirvāṇa
Will remain for one thousand years.
There will be a stūpa the size of eight leagues
Draped with nets of hundreds of jewels.
$1432 “The thus-gone Satyaketu
Will be born in a place called Crest of Clarity.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$1433 “Excellent Crest will be his father, and Crest Banner will be this victor’s mother.
Lamp will be his son and Divine Gift his attendant.
Supreme Light will be the scholar
And Clear Abiding the one of miracles.
$1434 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Whose minds are complete free from attachment to existence.
The lifespan of humans will be five hundred thousand years,
$1435 “And the sacred Dharma will remain [205.b]
For ninety-eight thousand years for the benefit of beings.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And remain the constant objects of worship for gods and humans.
$1436 “The protector of the world, Maṇḍita,
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Excellent Splendor.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1437 “Distinguished will be his father, and Mind Adornment will be this victor’s mother.
Honest will be his son and Gentle his attendant.
Adorned with Qualities will be the scholar
And Mind of Excellent Thought the one of miracles.
$1438 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred million
Meditators free from rigidity.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty years,
$1439 “And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
The single relic of this victor will be contained
In a stūpa of four leagues covered by canopies.
$1440 “The thus-gone Adīnaghoṣa
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Melody.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1441 “Melody Lord will be his father, and Beautiful Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Beautiful Voice will be his son and Supreme Tone his attendant.
Song of Love will be the scholar
And Supreme Melody the one of miracles.
$1442 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred million
Who have become worthy ones and are free from the plagues.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-three thousand years,
$1443 “And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be hundreds of thousands of stūpas.
$1444 “The buddha Ratnaprabha
Will be born in a place called Excellent Splendor of Merit.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend two leagues.
$1445 “Excellent Joy will be his father, and Joy in Abiding by the Training will be this victor’s mother.
Medicine will be his son and Power his attendant.
Dispeller of Existence will be the scholar
And Luminous Flower the one of miracles. [206.a]
$1446 “There will be thirteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred twenty million
Worthy ones endowed with spiritual training.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1447 “And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
$1448 “The thus-gone one Ghoṣadatta
Will be born in a place called Melody Joy.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1449 “Beautiful Melody will be his father, and Beautiful Tone will be this victor’s mother.
Possessor of Truth will be his son and Divine Excellence his attendant.
Joyous Melody of Excellent Qualities will be the one intelligence
And Melody of the Earth the one of miracles.
$1450 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thirty million
Worthy ones who benefit the world.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1451 “And the sacred Dharma of this trainer
Will remain for twenty thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa with the relics of this victor,
Measuring three leagues.
$1452 “The heart of sentient beings, Siṃha,
Will be born in a place called Roaring Lion.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1453 “Lion will be his father, and Deer Eye will be this victor’s mother.
Master Joy will be his son and Fierce Gift his attendant.
Melodious Roar will be the scholar
And Roar in the Brahmā Melody the one of miracles.
$1454 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Dharma-holding sons of the victorious ones.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1455 “And the sacred Dharma of this victor
Will remain for one hundred thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
Throughout the realms and adorned with gold.
$1456 “The thus-gone Citraraśmi
Will be born in a place called Supreme Radiance.
The family of this victor will be brahmin, [206.b]
And his light will extend five leagues.
$1457 “Excellent Moon will be his father, and Supreme Radiance will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Excellence will be his son and Moon his attendant.
Light of the Moon and Sun will be the scholar
And King of Astrologers the one of miracles.
$1458 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight million three hundred thousand
Who have attained the faculties.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1459 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be contained in a stūpa
That is adorned with precious, heavenly palaces.
$1460 “The thus-gone Jñānaśūra
Will be born in a place called Stūpa of the Ground.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-one leagues.
$1461 “Benefit Accomplished will be his father, and Powerful Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Dharma will be his son and Excellent Dharma his attendant.
Royal Intelligence will be the scholar
And Remaining Unperturbed the one of miracles.
$1462 “There will be twenty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Who have merged with liberation and attained serenity.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-three thousand years,
$1463 “And when this teacher has proceeded to cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa with the relics of this victor,
Five leagues large and beautifully decorated.
$1464 “The thus-gone Padmagarbha
Will be born in a place called Light of Merit.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1465 “Lotus will be his father, and Jewel Flower will be this victor’s mother.
Lotus Possessor will be his son and White Lotus his attendant.
Ascertained will be the scholar
And Royal Leader the one of miracles.
$1466 “There will be eleven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred billion
Vanquishers of the forces of the māras.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
$1467 “And the sacred Dharma of this being of infinite fame
Will remain for one hundred thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant, [207.a]
And there will be ninety billion stūpas.
$1468 “The protector of the world Puṣpita
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Blooming Flowers.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1469 “Fine Face will be his father, and Flower Chariot will be this victor’s mother.
Flower will be his son and Excellent Flower his attendant.
Holder of the Flower of Qualities will be the one intelligence
And Gathering of Flowers the one of miracles.
$1470 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred fifty million
Who have attained supreme liberation and fame.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$1471 “And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be contained in a stūpa
One league large and adorned with limitless decorations.
$1472 “The thus-gone Vikrāntagamin
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Extremely Powerful Merit.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1473 “Powerful will be his father, and Even Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Powerful will be his son and Powerful Experience his attendant.
Endowed with Powerful Joy will be the one of intelligence
And Royal Subjugator the one of miracles.
$1474 “There will be eighteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred million
Who remain for the happiness and benefit of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$1475 “And after this guide has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Worshiped and venerated in the world.
$1476 “The thus-gone Puṇyarāśi
Will be born in a place called Light of Merit.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1477 “Excellent Merit will be his father, and Light of Merit will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Joy will be his son and Powerful his attendant.
Enjoyer of Wealth will be the scholar
And Supreme Sentient Being the one of miracles.
$1478 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Who delight in wisdom and merge with awakening. [207.b]
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-four thousand years,
$1479 “And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a stūpa
Four leagues large and surrounded by banners.
$1480 “The thus-gone Śreṣṭharūpa
Will be born in a place called Mind of Excellent Thought.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1481 “Excellent Form will be his father, and Possessor of Form will be this victor’s mother.
Delightful will be his son and Beauty his attendant.
Possessing the Form of Excellent Qualities will be the scholar
And Considering Forms the one of miracles.
$1482 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Who are free from the becoming of karma and defilement.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy thousand years,
$1483 “And the sacred Dharma of this knower of the world
Will remain for thirty thousand years.
After this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will fill the three worlds.
$1484 “The guide of humans Jyotiṣka
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Splendid Light.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
$1485 “Excellent Light will be his father, and Supreme Luminosity will be this victor’s mother.
Elephant will be his son and Fame his attendant.
Light of Excellent Ritual will be the one of intelligence
And King of Astrologers the one of miracles.
$1486 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Who have pacified all defilement and conceit.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1487 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone in peace
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And decorated with lotus canopies.
$1488 “The thus-gone Candrapradīpa
Will be born in a place called Sun Lamp.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend sixty-three leagues.
$1489 “Excellent Crest will be his father, and Victorious Light will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Splendor will be his son and Joy his attendant. [208.a]
King of Great Gods will be the one of intelligence
And Fearless Splendor the one of miracles.
$1490 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred ninety million
Fearless practitioners of the concentrations and liberations.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy thousand years,
$1491 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
There will be a single stūpa with the relics of this victor,
Six leagues large and studded with jewels.
$1492 “The thus-gone Tejorāśi
Will be born in a place called Splendid Delight.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-six leagues.
$1493 “Sesame Oil Ruler will be his father, and Great Divine Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Joy of Wisdom will be his son and Light his attendant.
Infinite Light will be the one of intelligence
And Lamp of Great Beings the one of miracles.
$1494 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Who are free from the stains of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1495 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Worshiped and venerated by all wandering beings.
$1496 “The well-gone Bodhirāja
Will be born in a place called Wisdom That Causes Realization.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend sixty leagues.
$1497 “Excellent Mind will be his father, and Causing Realization will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Realization will be his son and Great Realization his attendant.
Giver of Realization will be the one of intelligence
And Beholding Realization the one of miracles.
$1498 “There will be twenty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Joyous ones free from delusion regarding liberation and the past.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$1499 “And for the benefit of beings the sacred Dharma
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Nine leagues large and adorned with jewels.
$1500 “The heart of beings Akṣaya [208.b]
Will be born in a place called Inexhaustible Radiance.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-one leagues.
$1501 “Inexhaustible Prince will be his father, and Ocean Sound will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Fame will be his son and Excellent Purity his attendant.
Inexhaustible Intelligence will be the scholar
And Supreme Mind the one of miracles.
$1502 “There will be eleven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine billion
Whose minds are free from the stains of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-three thousand years,
$1503 “And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Contained in hundreds of thousands of circles of stūpas.
$1504 “The victor Subuddhinetra
Will be born in a place called Abode of Wisdom.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$1505 “Excellent Eye will be his father, and Lovely Eye will be this victor’s mother.
Fine Eye will be his son and Love his attendant.
Nectar Eye will be the one of intelligence
And Purified Eye the one of miracles.
$1506 “There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering sixty-three billion
Whose minds are completely free from the three stains.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1507 “And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa,
Receiving the worship of gods and humans.
$1508 “The thus-gone Pūritāṅga
Will be born in a place called Pure.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty leagues.
$1509 “Supreme Excellence will be his father, and Supreme Limbs will be this victor’s mother.
Highest will be his son and Superior his attendant.
Beyond the World will be the scholar
And Guru of All Beings the one of miracles.
$1510 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering a full group
Of six hundred thirty thousand worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1511 “And for the benefit of beings [209.a]
The sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Venerated and worshiped by all wandering beings.
$1512 “The thus-gone Prajñārāṣṭra
Will be born in a place called Emerging Land.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1513 “Lord of the Land will be his father, and Supreme Land will be this victor’s mother.
Land of Excellence will be his son and Land his attendant.
Great Land will be the one of intelligence
And Encounter with Awakening the one of miracles.
$1514 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred million beings
Who are freed from cravings and defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1515 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has gone to the end of existence
Will remain for ninety-nine thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And all wandering beings will prostrate to them.
$1516 “The protector of the world, Uttama,
Will be born in a place called Supreme in All Regards.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
$1517 “Great Being will be his father, and Supreme Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme King will be his son and Qualities his attendant.
Stūpa of Qualities will be the scholar
And Worshiped by Gods the one of miracles.
$1518 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Who merge with liberation and awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
$1519 “And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The stūpa with the relics of this victor
Will be seventy leagues large and adorned with canopies.
$1520 “The thus-gone Toṣitatejas
Will be born in a place called Free from Contagion.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1521 “Luminous will be his father, and Endowed with Luminosity will be this victor’s mother.
Undaunted will be his son and Not Inferior his attendant.
Powerful Qualities will be the scholar [209.b]
And Gathering of the Superior the one of miracles.
$1522 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Worthy ones of perfectly pure mind.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty thousand years,
$1523 “And after this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And adorned with nets of hundreds of jewels and crystals.
$1524 “The buddha Prajñādatta
Will be born in a place called Wondrous Light.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1525 “Great Insight will be his father, and Supreme Insight will be this victor’s mother.
Insight Gift will be his son and Excellent Insight his attendant.
Great Insight will be the one of intelligence
And Fearless Insight the one of miracles.
$1526 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
Members of the supreme community of this king of victors.
The lifespan of humans will be seven hundred sixty million years,
$1527 “And the sacred Dharma of this defeater of all māras and defilements
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing among hundreds of thousands of stūpas.
$1528 “The thus-gone one Mañjughoṣa#143
Will be born in a place called Delightful Melody.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seven thousand leagues.
$1529 “Reasoning Mind will be his father, and Supreme Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Melody Lover will be his son and Joyous his attendant.
Melody of Abiding by the Training will be the scholar
And Supreme Melody the one of miracles.
$1530 “There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
Who have attained certainty regarding the perfections.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-six thousand years,
$1531 “And the sacred Dharma of this knower of the world
Will remain for one thousand years.
Upon attaining nirvāṇa the relics of this knower of the world
Will reside in a stūpa measuring eight leagues.
$1532 “The thus-gone Asaṅgakośa [210.a]
Will be born in a place called Accumulation of Merit.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
$1533 “Detached will be his father, and Divine Being will be this victor’s mother.
Truth Gift will be his son and Great Divinity his attendant.
Great Treasury Holder will be the one of intelligence
And God of Certainty the one of miracles.
$1534 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred ten million
Meditators free from grasping at entities.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy thousand years,
$1535 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the stūpas will number eight hundred billion.
$1536 “The thus-gone Jyeṣṭhadatta
Will be born in a place called Stūpa for Humanity.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1537 “Excellent Leader will be his father, and Supreme Leader will be this victor’s mother.
Leadership Lover will be his son and Leader his attendant.
Leader Gift will be the scholar
And Fearless Wisdom the one of miracles.
$1538 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Meditators free from conceit and pride.
The lifespan of humans will be fifty thousand years,
$1539 “And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a stūpa
Seven leagues large and decorated with gold.
$1540 “The thus-gone Śreṣṭha
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Supreme Offerings.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1541 “Supreme Excellence will be his father, and Jewel Merit will be this victor’s mother.
Star Possessor will be his son and Auspicious Star his attendant.
Merit Wish will be the scholar
And Beholding the Truth the one of miracles.
$1542 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
Destroyers of the māras, defilements, and views. [210.b]
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$1543 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain for ninety thousand years.
When this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa,
His relics will reside in a stūpa five leagues large.
$1544 “The thus-gone Jñānavikrama
Will be born in a place called Wisdom View.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-one leagues.
$1545 “Knowledgeable will be his father, and Supreme Knowledge will be this victor’s mother.
Knowledgeable will be his son and Great Knowledge his attendant.
Moon of Knowledge will be the scholar
And Wise Lamp of the Mind the one of miracles.
$1546 “There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred billion
Who regard gold and rock in the same way.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-eight thousand years,
$1547 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain for seventy-four thousand years.
The stūpas of the one gone to peace
Will number nine hundred eighty billion.
$1548 “The protector of the world, Arciṣmat,
Will be born in a place called Splendid Offerings.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1549 “Luminous will be his father, and Vajra Light will be this victor’s mother.
Radiance will be his son and Excellent Radiance his attendant.
Radiance of Qualities will be the scholar
And Lamp of Liberation the one of miracles.
$1550 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Worthy ones who have gone beyond training and burned defilement away.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1551 “And upon attaining nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And adorned with thousands of beautiful parasols.
$1552 “The heart of sentient beings, Indra,
Will be born in a place called Endowed with the Crest of Indra.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1553 “Ruling Banner will be his father, and Supreme Jewel will be this victor’s mother. [211.a]
Ruler will be his son and Excellent Ruler his attendant.
Crest of Great Rule will be the scholar
And Weapon Ruler the one of miracles.
$1554 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Worthy ones who have gone beyond training.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
$1555 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for eleven thousand years.
The relics will reside in a single, beautiful stūpa
That will be twelve leagues tall
And adorned with golden crested banners.
$1556 “The thus-gone Vegadhārin
Will be born in a place called Dharma Banner.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
$1557 “Excellent Mind will be his father, and Ocean of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Truth Speaker will be his son and Powerful his attendant.
Powerful Strength will be the scholar
And Worship of Meditative Accomplishment the one of miracles.
$1558 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
Bodhisattvas who are all irreversible.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-three thousand years,
$1559 “And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for three billion years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling all the lands with beauty.
$1560 “The heart of sentient beings, Tiṣya,
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Radiant Light.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1561 “Radiant Sacrifice will be his father, and Great Radiance will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Lord of Light his attendant.
Thoroughly Adorned will be the scholar
And Infinite Lord of Light the one of miracles.
$1562 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Worthy ones who have attained the eight liberations.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$1563 “And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. [211.b]
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Measuring ten leagues and studded with jewels.
$1564 “The protector of the world, Suprabha,
Will be born in a place called Riches.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1565 “Excellent Mind will be his father, and Radiant Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Mind will be his son and Great Mind his attendant.
Source of Mind will be the scholar
And Remaining in Mind the one of miracles.
$1566 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Who are free from attachment to all of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$1567 “And after this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in stūpas surrounded by banners.
$1568 “The protector of the world, Yaśodatta,
Will be born in a place called Worship and Veneration.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
$1569 “Excellent Mind will be his father, and Wish for Awakening will be this victor’s mother.
Bridge will be his son and Training his attendant.
Stūpa of the Directions will be the scholar
And Praise of the World the one of miracles.
$1570 “There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Contemplatives who are entirely free of the defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-three thousand years,
$1571 “And after this teacher has gone to peace
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-three thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and decorated with gold.
$1572 “The heart of sentient beings, Surūpa,
Will be born in a place called Liberation Joy.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend sixty-two leagues.
$1573 “Great Objective will be his father, and Gathering of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Being of Qualities will be his son and Meaningful his attendant.
Blooming Flower of Qualities will be the scholar
And Pursuit of Infinite Qualities the one of miracles. [212.a]
$1574 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Worthy ones who are free from the plagues and endowed with virtue.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
$1575 “And after this teacher has gone without remainder
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
When this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will fill all realms.
$1576 “The incomparable Rājan
Will be born in a place called King of Faith.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
$1577 “Excellent Splendor will be his father, and Royal Radiance will be this victor’s mother.
Royal Gift will be his son and Great King his attendant.
King of Humans will be the scholar
And Faith-Instilling King the one of miracles.
$1578 “There will be eighty-eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Worthy ones who joyfully accomplish fame.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred twenty thousand years,
$1579 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain for ninety-two thousand years.
When this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will fill all of the realms.
$1580 “The thus-gone Arthasiddhi
Will be born in a place called Reaching Liberation.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety leagues.
$1581 “Happiness Accomplished will be his father, and Meaningful Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Meaningful Gift will be his son and Great Meaning his attendant.
Compiled Acumen will be the one of intelligence
And Light of Merit the one of miracles.
$1582 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred twenty million
Who are free from conceit, pride, and delusion.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$1583 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has relinquished the defilements
Will also remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside
In a single stūpa measuring nine leagues.
$1584 “The thus-gone Siṃhasena [212.b]
Will be born in a place called Hard to Bear.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eight leagues.
$1585 “Excellent Sacrifice will be his father, and Light of the Noble will be this victor’s mother.
Sound of Thunder will be his son and Crest his attendant.
Courageous Strength will be the scholar
And Lion Gait the one of miracles.
$1586 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Worthy ones who merit supreme worship.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$1587 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone beyond grasping
Will remain for twenty-four thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in ninety-nine trillion stūpas.
$1588 “The heart of sentient beings, Vāsava,
Will be born in a place called Source of Splendor.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
$1589 “Moon Ruler will be his father, and Star King will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Arrival will be his son and Lap Born his attendant.
Divine Light will be the scholar
And Divine Eye the one of miracles.
$1590 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
Worthy ones who have attained the supreme fruition of merit.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$1591 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has reached the pacification of existence
Will remain for ninety-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and studded with jewels.
$1592 “The incomparable Yaśas
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Offerings.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$1593 “Endowed with Wealth will be his father, and Supreme Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Star Possessor will be his son and Excellent Gift his attendant.
Moon of Power will be the scholar
And Limitless Light the one of miracles.
$1594 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Who are all free from attachment. [213.a]
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
$1595 “And for the benefit of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
When this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant and reside in ten billion stūpas.
$1596 “The protector of the world, Jaya,
Will be born in a place called Hard to Conquer.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty thousand leagues.
$1597 “Great Ruler will be his father, and Free from Conceit#144 will be this victor’s mother.
Ascertainment will be his son and Moon his attendant.
Dharma Mode will be the scholar
And Continuous Excellent Intention the one of miracles.
$1598 “There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations,
Each of them bringing together
A fine gathering of one trillion worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
$1599 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Measuring three leagues, adorned with golden canopies,
And surrounded by a hundred billion archways.
$1600 “The thus-gone Udāragarbha
Will be born in a place called Infinite Worship.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$1601 “Excellent Realization will be his father, and Wish for Liberation will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Liberation will be his son and Liberation his attendant.
Light of the Ground will be the scholar
And Defeater of the Māras the one of miracles.
$1602 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Sages who have accomplished a mind equal to the sky.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$1603 “And the sacred Dharma will remain
For one hundred twenty-one thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and decorated with thousands of crown jewels.
$1604 “The thus-gone Puṇyaraśmi
Will be born in a place called Starlight.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty leagues.
$1605 “Excellent Merit will be his father, and Light of Merit will be this victor’s mother. [213.b]
Strength of Merit will be his son and Qualities his attendant.
Leader Qualities will be the scholar
And Worshiped by Gods the one of miracles.
$1606 “There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
Who have accomplished liberation by means of the Great Vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
$1607 “And for the benefit of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-one thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
Residing in eight hundred million stūpas.
$1608 “The protector of the world, Suraśmi,
Will be born in a place called Constant Light.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-eight leagues.
$1609 “Special Insight will be his father, and Light Ornament will be this victor’s mother.
Light Gift will be his son and Luminous his attendant.
Gentle Light will be the scholar
And Infinite Light the one of miracles.
$1610 “There will be one hundred consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Who remain unshakable, like mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be one thousand years,
$1611 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-six years.
His relics will reside in a stūpa four leagues large,
Adorned with tassels of hundreds of jewels
And emitting the sounds of one billion cymbals.
$1612 “The incomparable Śrotriya
Will be born in a place called Washing Suffering Away.
His immaculate family will be kṣatriya
And his light will extend as far as the billionfold world.
$1613 “Powerful will be his father, and Possessor of Splendor will be this victor’s mother.
Gathering of Qualities will be his son and Mindful his attendant.
Light of Liberation will be the scholar
And Defeater of Attacks the one of miracles.
$1614 “There will infinite congregations,
Each of them gathering exclusively irreversible ones who have achieved retention
And reside within supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be ten billion years,
$1615 “And for the sake of the gathering of irreversible ones
The sacred Dharma will remain for seven hundred sixty million years. [214.a]
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Propagated by gods and humans throughout the trichiliocosm.
$1616 “The thus-gone Pradīparāja will be born in a place called Endowed with Excellence. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three thousand leagues. Mountain of Light will be his father. Heap of Splendid Light will be his mother. Relinquisher of the Lower Realms will be his son. Infinite Intelligence will be his attendant. Meaningful Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Jewel Crest will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1617 “The thus-gone Jñānakūṭa will be born in a place called Endowed with Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Supreme Wisdom will be his father. Light of Fame will be his mother. Precious Power will be his son. Abiding Mind will be his attendant. Array of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Mountain of Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation will gather nine hundred eighty million hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred million, and in the third there will be one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1618 “The thus-gone Uttamadeva will be born in a place called Supreme Limbs. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twelve leagues. Endowed with Dharma will be his father. Endowed with Bliss will be his mother. Supreme Limbs will be his son. Royal Limbs will be his attendant. Uncluttered Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Stainless Insight will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [214.b] There will be ten consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1619 “The thus-gone Pārthiva will be born in a place called Superior Insight. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Master will be his father. Indomitable will be his mother. Fame and Beauty will be his son. Stūpa for Humanity will be his attendant. Powerful Hero will be foremost in terms of insight. Moving with Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1620 “The thus-gone Vimuktilābhin will be born in a place called Indomitable. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand leagues. Sky Treasury will be his father. Array of Offerings will be his mother. Array of Jewels will be his son. Joy in Teaching will be his attendant. Melody of Truth will be foremost in terms of insight. Melody of Great Mastery will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering two hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1621 “The thus-gone Suvarṇacūḍa will be born in a place called Peak of Recollection. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five thousand leagues. Precious Splendor will be his father. Wish to Praise will be his mother. Prince will be his son. Even Mind will be his attendant. Unimpeded Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. [215.a] Qualities in All Regards will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventeen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ten thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1622 “The thus-gone Rāhubhadra will be born in a place called Infinite Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six leagues. Immaculate Light will be his father. Jewel Movement will be his mother. Clear Intelligence will be his son. Universal Worship will be his attendant. Infinite Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Pure Body will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1623 “The thus-gone Durjaya will be born in a place called Victorious Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Superior Training will be his father. Divine Flower will be his mother. Divine Light will be his son. Reaching Awakening will be his attendant. Melody of Virtue will be foremost in terms of insight. Delightful Melody will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for nine thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1624 “The thus-gone Muniprasanna will be born in a place called Strength of Serenity. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Sense Control will be his father. Little Stūpa will be his mother. Stable Mode will be his son. Unobscured Mode will be his attendant. [215.b] Immeasurable Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Flower of Splendor will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ten thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1625 “The thus-gone Somaraśmi will be born in a place called Illuminating Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three thousand leagues. Moon of Joy will be his father. Luminous will be his mother. Divine Worship will be his son. God of Worship will be his attendant. Liberating Conquest will be foremost in terms of insight. Gift of Nirvāṇa will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1626 “The thus-gone Kāñcanaprabha will be born in a place called Endowed with Golden Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Joyous Sight will be his father. Deity of the World will be his mother. Crown Jewel will be his son. Jewel Essence will be his attendant. Infinite Light will be foremost in terms of insight. Hard to Show will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be three consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety years. His relics will be abundant. All the sentient beings in his retinue will without exception be irreversible with respect to the attainment of unsurpassable awakening.
$1627 “The thus-gone Sudatta will be born in a place called Equal to the Master of the Gathering. [216.a] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Seeing in All Directions will be his father. Delighting the Noble will be his mother. Adhering to the Training will be his son. Excellent Weapon will be his attendant. Flower Lamp will be foremost in terms of insight. Jewel Lamp will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1628 “The thus-gone Guṇendradeva will be born in a place called Divine Land. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Brahmā Sustenance will be his father. Brahmā Sound will be his mother. Divine Joy will be his son. Delighting the Noble will be his attendant. Virtuous Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Abandoning Doubt will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1629 “The thus-gone Dharmacchattra will be born in a place called King of Virtue. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Moon Parasol will be his father. Divine Joy will be his mother. Flower of Qualities will be his son. Flower of Wisdom will be his attendant. Worthy of Worship will be foremost in terms of insight. Abandoning Doubt will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years. His relics will be abundant. [216.b]
$1630 “The thus-gone Puṇyabāhu will be born in a place called Hand Master. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Jewel Hand will be his father. Nāga Hand will be his mother. Divine Stūpa will be his son. Gathering of Qualities will be his attendant. Offering of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme King will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering five hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1631 “The thus-gone Asaṅga will be born in a place called Source of Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight hundred leagues. Clear View will be his father. Joyous View will be his mother. Birth of Happy Mind will be his son. Divine Worship will be his attendant. Vajra Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Crest of Excellence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1632 “The thus-gone Prāṇītajñāna will be born in a place called Infinite Excellence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty thousand leagues. Light of Wisdom will be his father. Radiance of Wisdom will be his mother. Divine Wisdom will be his son. Famed Intelligence will be his attendant. Ocean of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. God of the Land will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for forty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. [217.a] There will also only be one stūpa.
$1633 “The thus-gone Sūkṣmabuddhi will be born in a place called Source of Delight. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Uncluttered Mind will be his father. Impeccable Limbs will be his mother. Sandalwood Joy will be his son. Worshiped by the World will be his attendant. Powerful Hero will be foremost in terms of insight. Divine Worthy One will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1634 “The thus-gone Sarvatejas will be born in a place called Lord of Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Crest Light will be his father. Luminous Qualities will be his mother. Light of Merit will be his son. Fame will be his attendant. Divine Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Radiance of Liberation will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1635 “The thus-gone Oṣadhi will be born in a place called Light of Freedom from Suffering. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Beautiful Eye will be his father. Giver of Lightning will be his mother. Lamp of the Mind will be his son. Glorious Supreme Excellence will be his attendant. Supreme World will be foremost in terms of insight. Seeing Everything will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. [217.b] His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1636 “The thus-gone Vimuktaketu will be born in a place called Crest Banner. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Crest Banner will be his father. Great Crest will be his mother. Famed Intelligence will be his son. Fame throughout the Directions will be his attendant. Lion Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Roaring Thunder will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy-five thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1637 “The thus-gone Prabhākośa will be born in a place called Hidden Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as six worlds of four continents. Jewel Mind will be his father. Supreme Faith will be his mother. Supreme Luminosity will be his son. Joyous Sight will be his attendant. Crest Banner will be foremost in terms of insight. Crest of the Child of the Wealth God will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1638 “The thus-gone Jñānarāja will be born in a place called Supreme Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Endowed with Light will be his father. Luminous Qualities will be his mother. Adorned with Marks will be his son. Delightful to Behold will be his attendant. Lamp of the View will be foremost in terms of insight. Flower of Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [218.a] There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-two thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1639 “The thus-gone Bhīṣaṇa will be born in a place called Supremely Terrifying. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Great Lord will be his father. Virtuous will be his mother. Divine Worship will be his son. Gathering of Qualities will be his attendant. Inexhaustible Intellect will be foremost in terms of insight. Vision through the View will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seven thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1640 “The thus-gone Oghajaha will be born in a place called Luminous Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend forty leagues. Light of Heroes will be his father. Free from the Swamp will be his mother. Leader of the Land will be his son. Accepting the View will be his attendant. Action without Unwholesomeness will be foremost in terms of insight. Not Traveling by Foot will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering sixty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1641 “The thus-gone Asaṅgakīrti will be born in a place called Luminous Directions. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Gift of the Great Lord will be his father. [218.b]Luminous will be his mother. Luminous Mind will be his son. Star Radiance will be his attendant. Perfectly Trained will be foremost in terms of insight. Mode of Great Serenity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering five hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1642 “The thus-gone Satyarāśi will be born in a place called Crest of Truth. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Stainless Fame will be his father. Seeing the Dharma will be his mother. Illuminator will be his son. Dharma Melody will be his attendant. Mind Free from Delusion will be foremost in terms of insight. Extraordinary Sight will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering five hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-two thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1643 “The thus-gone Susvara will be born in a place called Land of Excellence. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixteen leagues. Powerful Action will be his father. Endowed with Dharma will be his mother. Joyous Teacher will be his son. Excellent Sight will be his attendant. Great Crest will be foremost in terms of insight. Supreme Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1644 “The thus-gone Girīndrakalpa will be born in a place called Rich Connections. [219.a] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. King of the Array will be his father. Infinite Array will be his mother. Great Array will be his son. Accumulated Learning will be his attendant. Accumulated Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Clear Gift of Wealth will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations of worthy ones. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1645 “The thus-gone Dharmakūṭa will be born in a place called Rich Array of Excellence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend nine leagues. Beautiful Acumen will be his father. Splendid Array will be his mother. Clear View will be his son. Holder of Shooting Stars will be his attendant. Gathering of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Power of Truth will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty-eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1646 “The thus-gone Mokṣatejas will be born in a place called Splendid Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend fourteen leagues. Infinite Splendor be his father. Infinite Array will be his mother. Attentive to Virtue will be his son. Noble Discipline will be his attendant. Dharma Fame will be foremost in terms of insight. Stainless Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty-nine consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-six thousand years. [219.b] His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1647 “The thus-gone Śobhita will be born in a place called Free from Suffering. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend two hundred leagues. Excellent Sight will be his father. All-Seeing will be his mother. Indomitable will be his son. Gathering of Qualities will be his attendant. Light of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Vajra Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be six consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1648 “The thus-gone Praśāntagātra will be born in a place called Pacified and Tamed. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Powerful Elephant will be his father. Light of Merit will be his mother. Joy in Abiding by the Training will be his son. Pure Abode will be his attendant. Perfectly Pure Discipline will be foremost in terms of insight. Unsupported Conduct will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eleven consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering five hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twelve thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eleven thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1649 “The thus-gone Manojñavākya will be born in a place called Compelling Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Lion’s Roar will be his father. Mind of Detachment will be his mother. Fearless Splendor will be his son. Sublime Roar will be his attendant. Powerful Ruler will be foremost in terms of insight. Wheel of Strengths will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering five hundred million. [220.a] The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty-three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1650 “The thus-gone Cīrṇabuddhi will be born in a place called Excellent Gait. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Lion Flank will be his father. Lion Intelligence will be his mother. Royal Thunder will be his son. Lion’s Roar will be his attendant. Unobscured Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Possessor of Action will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering six million eight hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-nine thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1651 “The thus-gone Varuṇa will be born in a place called Nāga Melody. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Roaring Nāga Melody will be his father. Nāga Glory will be his mother. Supreme Nāga will be his son. Foremost Being will be his attendant. Mind of Acumen will be foremost in terms of insight. Fearless Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1652 “The thus-gone Jagatpūjita will be born in a place called Śāla Ruler. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three leagues. Accompanied by the Ruler’s Roar will be his father. Infinite Teacher will be his mother. Ruler Radiance will be his son. Ruler Gift will be his attendant. Power of Precious Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. [220.b] Mind of Insight and Aspiration will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1653 “The thus-gone Siṃhapārśva will be born in a place called Golden Flank. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Jewel Banner will be his father. Precious Splendor will be his mother. Hidden Jewel will be his son. Gift of Beauty will be his attendant. Luminous Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Distinct Fame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1654 “The thus-gone Dharmavikrāmin will be born in a place called Qualities of Power. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Great Power will be his father. Wisdom Power will be his mother. Superior Jewel will be his son. Clear Mind will be his attendant. Roaring Thunder will be foremost in terms of insight. Glorious Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1655 “The thus-gone Subhaga will be born in a place called Attractive Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five leagues. Attractive Ripening will be his father. Luminous Qualities will be his mother. Divine Wish will be his son. Abiding Free from Delusion will be his attendant. Lamp of Fame will be foremost in terms of insight. [221.a] Radiance Adorned with the Moon will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1656 “The thus-gone Akṣobhyavarṇa will be born in a place called Supreme Heaven of Glorious Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend far as the trichiliocosm. King of the Splendid Light of Excellent Gold will be his father. Array of Infinite Qualities will be his mother. Melody of the Splendid Radiance Adorned with the Moon will be his son. King of the Array of Empowering Wisdom will be his attendant. Intelligence of the Revealer of the Mind of the Ocean of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Colors of the Splendor That Cannot Become Flawed Yet Defeats the Hordes of the Māras will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one hundred thousand consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eighty trillion irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1657 “The thus-gone Tejorāja will be born in a place called King of the Hundred Thousandfold Factors of Precious Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three million leagues. Light of Infinite Qualities will be his father. Radiance of Splendid Reasoning will be his mother. Glorious Banner of the Stainless Moon Crest will be his son. Gift of the Light of Wisdom will be his attendant. Mind That Accomplishes the Unfathomable Array will be foremost in terms of insight. Authentic Emergence from the Luminous Splendor of Buddhahood will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. [221.b] His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1658 “The thus-gone Bodhana will be born in a place called Radiant Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight hundred leagues. Utterly Pure Mind will be his father. Endowed with Clear Mind will be his mother. Wisdom Gift That Comprehends All Qualities will be his son. Wish for Delightful Attention will be his attendant. Source of Insight Possessing the Mind Aspiring to Awakening will be foremost in terms of insight. Light of Jewel Flowers will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight billion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1659 “The thus-gone Sulocana will be born in a place called Displaying an Array of a Hundred Thousand Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-four thousand leagues. King of Clear and Unmistaken Conduct will be his father. Possessing the Superior Splendor of the Aggregate of Wisdom will be his mother. Intelligence That Reveals Inexhaustible Language will be his son. Blooming Flower That Does Not Doubt the Light of Insight will be his attendant. Possessing the Colors of the Splendid Sun That Remains Unaffected in the Face of Billions of Māras will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed King of the Splendor of All Jewels will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1660 “The thus-gone Sthitārtha­buddhi will be born in a place called Array of Infinite Meaning. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten leagues. Ultimate King will be his father. [222.a] Queen Free from Doubt about the Welfare of Sentient Beings will be his mother. Jewel Treasury will be his son. Splendor That Holds Hundreds of Thousands of Qualities will be his attendant. Eliminator of Enemy Attacks will be foremost in terms of insight. Adorned with the Earrings of Compiled Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for fifty-three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1661 “The thus-gone Ābhāsaraśmi will be born in a place called Splendid Array of Infinite Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand leagues. Adorned with All Light will be his father. Splendor of the Radiant Light of Wisdom will be his mother. Famed Light of Aggregated Splendor will be his son. King of the Mind’s Wisdom will be his attendant. Certainty of the Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Victory Banner Crest of Perfect Fame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1662 “The thus-gone Gandhatejas will be born in a place called Splendid Light Perfumed by the Fragrance of Agarwood. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one league. Light of Infinite Fragrances will be his father. Light of the Fragrance of a Hundred Qualities will be his mother. Mind with the Intelligence of the Royal Master of Fragrances will be his son. Mind of Luminous Qualities and Fragrance will be his attendant. Sunlight of Sweet Fragrant Sandalwood will be foremost in terms of insight. Illuminating Light of Splendent Fragrances will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, [222.b] each of them gathering one hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1663 “The thus-gone Saṃtoṣaṇa will be born in a place called Satisfying Sight of Precious Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Purified by the Melody of Nectar will be his father. Speaker of Gentle Words will be his mother. Body of Clear View will be his son. Radiant Light of the Qualities of Contentment will be his attendant. Limbs of the Intention of Sublime Satisfaction of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Crusher of Attacks will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred sixty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1664 “The thus-gone Amoghagāmin will be born in a place called Array of Unobscured Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five leagues. Child of the Splendid Scattering of Doubts will be his father. Ascertaining the Light of Insight will be his mother. Patience with Partial Views will be his son. Illuminating Insight will be his attendant. Proclaimer of the Truth will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable Royal Crest Banner will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1665 “The thus-gone Bhasmakrodha will be born in a place called Free from the Thorns of Defilement. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend four thousand leagues. Free from Darkness will be his father. Sight of the Mind of Love will be his mother. Heap of Qualities will be his son. Flawless Gift will be his attendant. [223.a] Abiding by the Pacification of the Flaws of Arrogance will be foremost in terms of insight. Flower of Adherence to Calm Abiding and Discipline will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seven hundred million worthy ones; in the second there will be eight hundred million; in the third, nine hundred million; and in the fourth, one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1666 “The thus-gone Vararūpa will be born in a place called Precious and Holy Elements That Are Objects of Worship. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety-six leagues. Splendid Heap of Jewels will be his father. Splendor That Cannot Be Outshone by Any Mundane Form will be his mother. Form Gift will be his son. Mind Intent on Accomplishing the Symbols of Form will be his attendant. King of the Blooming Flowers of Radiant Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Mind Intent on Perfecting the Accomplishment of the Symbols of Form will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one million four hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-eight thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1667 “The thus-gone Sukrama will be born in a place called Array of the Great Mode. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy leagues. Intent on the Beautiful Mode will be his father. Mode of Seeing the Eye of the Leader will be his mother. Giving by Advancing with the Weapons of the Faculties will be his son. Body of the Lion Lords and Thirty River Kings will be his attendant. Possessor of the Mind That Accomplishes Authentic Practices throughout Innumerable Eons will be foremost in terms of insight. Unrelenting Diligence and the Constant Array of Greatness will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [223.b] There will be twenty-five consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering two hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for twenty-eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1668 “The thus-gone Pradānakīrti will be born in a place called Banner of Infinite Renown. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight hundred leagues. Famed Power will be his father. Holder of Infinite Renown will be his mother. Exalted Renown will be his son. King of Great Fame will be his attendant. Clarity of Supreme Renown will be foremost in terms of insight. Truly Superior Instiller of Faith and Renown among Others will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1669 “The thus-gone Śuddhaprabha will be born in a place called Vision of the Noble. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixteen leagues. Mind of True Meaning will be his father. Mind of Nectar will be his mother. Time-Given Melody will be his son. Holder of Inexhaustible Language and Signs will be his attendant. Army Conqueror will be foremost in terms of insight. Bold Destroyer of Attacks will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1670 “The thus-gone Devasūrya will be born in a place called Light of Infinite Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Superior Light will be his father. Splendid Array of Infinite Light will be his mother. [224.a] Beauty in All Worlds will be his son. Intent on Praise by the Entire World will be his attendant. Precious Qualities of Superknowledge will be foremost in terms of insight. Holder of the Symbols of All Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering five hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty-five thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1671 “The thus-gone Prajñādatta will be born in a place called Possessor of the Meteor of Insight. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Blooming Flower of Superknowledge through the Meteor of Insight will be his father. Infinitely Luminous Bodily Beauty will be his mother. King of Ascertaining Insight will be his son. Mind Trained and Purified through Insight will be his attendant. Unperturbed Progression of Peak Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Mountain of Thorough Ascertainment will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1672 “The thus-gone Samāhitātman will be born in a place called Famed Abiding. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Discovering and Attaining Calm Abiding will be his father. Unmoving Mind will be his mother. Splendid Nectar of Recollection will be his son. Possessor of the Mind That Is the Vessel of Precious Liberation will be his attendant. Dwelling in the Serenity Mode of Virtuous Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Mind That Accomplishes the Immutable Stage will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [224.b] There will be eighty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1673 “The thus-gone Ojastejas will be born in a place called Movement of Bright Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand leagues. Supreme Crest of Royal Splendor will be his father. Gift of the Light of Wisdom will be his mother. Luminous Wealth God will be his son. Crest Banner of Heaps of Merit will be his attendant. Great Lamp Aggregate will be foremost in terms of insight. Possessor of the Mind That Emerges from the Limit of Detachment will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1674 “The thus-gone Kṣatriya will be born in a place called Child of the Royal Sage. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five thousand leagues. Crest of the Riches of Merit will be his father. Mode of Merit will be his mother. Land of Dharma Virtue will be his son. Wisdom Possessor Who Expands the Realm will be his attendant. Power Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon-Like Supreme Accomplisher will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering fourteen billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1675 “The thus-gone Bhāgīrathi will be born in a place called Light of Fearlessness. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirteen leagues. Gift of the Water God will be his father. [225.a] Vision through the View will be his mother. Inexhaustible Crest will be his son. Extremely Noble Mind will be his attendant. Clear View will be foremost in terms of insight. Intelligence Free from Doubt will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty-six consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering six hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1676 “The thus-gone Suvarṇottama will be born in a place called Supreme Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Jewel Light will be his father. Beryl Light will be his mother. Perfectly Pure Jewel will be his son. Source of Jewels will be his attendant. Proclamation of Limitless Jewels will be foremost in terms of insight. Superknowledge of All Jewels will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventeen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering two billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for twenty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1677 “The thus-gone Vimuktacūḍa will be born in a place called Sight of Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten thousand leagues. Helmet Bearer will be his father. Illuminating Sun will be his mother. Crest Banner will be his son. Mind of Detachment will be his attendant. Abiding by Unshakable Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Leader of Supreme Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty-one consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering four million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa. [225.b]
$1678 “The thus-gone Dhārmika will be born in a place called Endowed with the Light of Shooting Dharma Stars. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Jewel Lamp will be his father. Faith in Awakening will be his mother. Radiance for Wandering Beings will be his son. Worshiped by the World will be his attendant. Crest of Nectar Essence will be foremost in terms of insight. Splendor of the Faith of Wandering Beings will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering eight hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1679 “The thus-gone Sthitagandha will be born in a place called Faith of All Beings. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventeen leagues. Relinquishment of Fact and Nonfact will be his father. Stopping the Loss of Adherence to the Realized Meaning of will be his mother. Cessation of All Transmigration will be his son. Possessor of the Mind of the Home of the Nāga Lord will be his attendant. Attaining the Illumination That Pacifies All Wandering Beings will be foremost in terms of insight. Attentive to Relinquishment by Means of Realization and Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering seven hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1680 “The thus-gone Madaprahīṇa will be born in a place called Possessor of Learned Intelligence. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Mind Free from Arrogance will be his father. Conduct Free from Delusion will be his mother. Relinquishment with Leonine Strength will be his son. Attainment of Supreme Worship will be his attendant. Crest of Faith in Noble Beings will be foremost in terms of insight. Intelligent Conduct of the Sages will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [226.a] There will be seven consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering five billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1681 “The thus-gone Jñānakośa will be born in a place called Array of Infinite Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as eight worlds of four continents. Inexhaustible Intelligence Regarding the Symbols of Form will be his father. Luminous Intelligence will be his mother. Melody of Joy will be his son. Mind of Melodious Song#145 will be his attendant. Residing within Precious Liberation will be foremost in terms of insight. Teacher of the Luminous Mount will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering two hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1682 “The thus-gone Brahmagāmin will be born in a place called Jewel of Compassion and Freedom from Ignorance. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty leagues. Mind of Great Compassion will be his father. Vision of Unobscured Love will be his mother. Accepting the View will be his son. King of the Splendor of Excellent Body will be his attendant. Truly Superior Totality of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Beautiful Array will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1683 “The thus-gone Candana will be born in a place called Land of Courage. [226.b] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Learned Diligence will be his father. Unrelenting Diligence will be his mother. Powerful Abiding will be his son. Indomitable Power will be his attendant. Gift of Powerful Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Attainment Worthy of the World’s Worship will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering six hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1684 “The thus-gone Aśoka will be born in a place called Free from Suffering. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twenty-four thousand leagues. Pure Clarity will be his father. Relinquishing All Suffering will be his mother. Flawless Aspiration will be his son. Unperturbed Mind will be his attendant. Attention without Blurriness will be foremost in terms of insight. Endowed with the Mind of the Clear View will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-nine thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1685 “The thus-gone Siṃharaśmi will be born in a place called Endowed with the Absence of Self. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-six leagues. Seeing the Dharma will be his father. Abiding by Emptiness will be his mother. Possessor of Universal View will be his son. Indeterminate Array will be his attendant. Clear Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Certain Mind of Complete Vision will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-one thousand years. [227.a] His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1686 “The thus-gone Keturāṣṭra will be born in a place called Crest of Infinite Lands. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Crest Roar will be his father. Crest Follower will be his mother. Infinite Crest will be his son. Renown of Precious Qualities will be his attendant. Luminous Crest of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Leader of Joyous Gods will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twelve consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering fifteen thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be fourteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1687 “The thus-gone Padmagarbha will be born in a place called Growing of All Flowers. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twenty-two leagues. Accomplishment of the Approach will be his father. Endowed with Wisdom will be his mother. Unfathomable Excellent Splendor will be his son. God of the Gathering of Gods will be his attendant. Measure of the View will be foremost in terms of insight. Superior Infinite View will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1688 “The thus-gone Anantatejas will be born in a place called Adorned with Splendid Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy leagues. Worshiped by Gods will be his father. Light Gift will be his mother. Lamp of Intelligence will be his son. Infinite Mind will be his attendant. Source of Virtue will be foremost in terms of insight. [227.b] Excellent Sharpness will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will abundant.
$1689 “The thus-gone Devaraśmi will be born in a place called Divine Faith. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Unshakable Power will be his father. Meaningful Worship will be his mother. Wish for Worship will be his son. Flower Gift will be his attendant. Attaining the Great Objective will be foremost in terms of insight. Tremendous Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1690 “The thus-gone Prajñāpuṣpa will be born in a place called Precious Flower. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Flower of Qualities will be his father. Nectar Flower will be his mother. Merit Flower will be his son. Flower of Nirvāṇa will be his attendant. Flower of the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Splendor of the Precious Flower will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1691 “The thus-gone Vidvat will be born in a place called Jewel Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty-four leagues. Lotus Essence will be his father. Splendid Gift of Excellent Flowers will be his mother. Splendid Mind of Reflecting Splendid Merit will be his son. [228.a] Donning Courage will be his attendant. Endowed with a Roaring Mind while Donning the Robes of Sacrifice will be foremost in terms of insight. Mind of Stainless Luminosity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1692 “The thus-gone Samṛddhajñāna will be born in a place called Jewel Riches. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine hundred leagues. Splendid Jewel Light will be his father. Jewel Light will be his mother. Jewel Source will be his son. Jewel Lamp will be his attendant. Excellent Jewel will be foremost in terms of insight. Glory of Supreme Excellence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be nineteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for nine thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1693 “The thus-gone Brahmavasu will be born in a place called Shining Treasure. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty leagues. Roar of Retention will be his father. Glory of Supreme Brahmā will be his mother. King Observing Liberation will be his son. Infinite Mass will be his attendant. Great Royal Banner of Fame will be foremost in terms of insight. Source of the Nectar of Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-eight consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1694 “The thus-gone Ratnapāṇi will be born in a place called Jewel Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight hundred leagues. [228.b] Jewel Hand will be his father. Infinite Jewels will be his mother. Viewing Qualities will be his son. Jewel Eye will be his attendant. Bodily Array of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Irreproachable Body will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering six million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1695 “The thus-gone Indrama will be born in a place called Famed Array of the Ornaments of the Faculties. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy leagues. Faculty Gift will be his father. Splendor of Demigods will be his mother. Gift of Clear Faculties will be his son. Stable Faculties of Amassed Glory will be his attendant. Famed Banner of Illumination will be foremost in terms of insight. Expert in Remaining Detached will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering sixty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$1696 “The thus-gone Anupamavādin will be born in a place called Great Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Capable Tamer will be his father. Clear Qualities will be his mother. Supreme Mind will be his son. Luminous Peace will be his attendant. Splendor of Noble Faith will be foremost in terms of insight. King Beyond Doubt will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa. [229.a]
$1697 “The thus-gone Jyeṣṭhavādin will be born in a place called Extremely Clear View. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Glorious Supreme Light will be his father. Bearer of Indomitable Colors will be his mother. King of Fame will be his son. Nectar Lamp will be his attendant. Possessor of the Mind That Partakes of Infinite Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Intelligence That Teaches without Attachment to Language will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy-eight consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eight million eight hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1698 “The thus-gone Pūjya will be born in a place called Infinite Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight hundred leagues. Discerning the Meaning will be his father. Endowed with Starlight will be his mother. Joy for the World will be his son. Superior Faith will be his attendant. Worshiped by the World#146 will be foremost in terms of insight. King of the Certainty of Insight and Acumen will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1699 “The thus-gone Tiṣya will be born in a place called Light of Infinite Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as thirty worlds of four continents. Famed Luminous Crest of Precious Qualities will be his father. Queen of the Array of the Ornaments of Acumen will be his mother. Superknowledge of Precious Qualities will be his son. Possessor of Indomitable Mind Who Terrifies the Māras will be his attendant. Attaining the Superknowledge of Undaunted Love will be foremost in terms of insight. [229.b] Possessor of the Gathering of Unconquerable Overpowering Energy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering three billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1700 “The thus-gone Sūrya will be born in a place called Array of Sunlight. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as a millionfold universe. Renowned Illumination of the Directions will be his father. Light of the Essence of the Sun will be his mother. Mind of the Emerging Crest of Stainless Light will be his son. King of the Array of Offerings through Conduct in the World will be his attendant. Perfect Renown for Subduing Adversaries with Stable Diligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Endowed with the Playful Melody of the Flowers of Precious Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-six consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred million irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1701 “The thus-gone Uttīrṇapaṅka will be born in a place called Infinite Array of Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as a trichiliocosm. Abandoning the Rivers will be his father. Intelligence of an Ocean of Precious Qualities will be his mother. Mind of the Array of Melodies will be his son. King of the Superknowledge of the Flower of Wisdom will be his attendant. Splendor of Playful Undeluded Existence will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed for Unstoppable Understanding of the Ten Powers will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion bodhisattvas impeded by a single birth only, as well as seven hundred forty million others. [230.a] The extent of his lifespan will be ten thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1702 “The thus-gone Jñānaprāpta will be born in a place called Created and Brightly Adorned with Wisdom. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight leagues. Increasing Wisdom will be his father. Essence of Wisdom will be his mother. Clear Wisdom will be his son. Wishing to Hear Wisdom will be his attendant. Proclaiming the Truth in All Possible Ways will be foremost in terms of insight. Universal Display of Emanations will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1703 “The thus-gone Siddhi will be born in a place called Shining with Precious Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six hundred leagues. Consuming Faith in Awakening will be his father. Light of Seeing the Sun and Moon will be his mother. Splendor of Precious Flowers will be his son. Mind of Shining Qualities will be his attendant. Eliminator of Enemy Attacks will be foremost in terms of insight. Wealth-Granting Mind of Unerring Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be five consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering one hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1704 “The thus-gone Mayūra will be born in a place called Delightful Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight leagues. Strong Hands and Language will be his father. [230.b] Kinnara Melody will be his mother. Master of All Signs and Language will be his son. Abiding by Mastery Free from Delusion will be his attendant. Appearance of One’s Own Sounds will be foremost in terms of insight. Roar Adorned with a Hundred Thousand Virtues will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering five million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1705 “The thus-gone Dharmadatta will be born in a place called Accomplishing the Array of Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six leagues. Source of Dharma will be his father. Dharma Intelligence of the Mind of Excellent Thoughts will be his mother. Crest of the Precious Dharma will be his son. King of the Lamp of Dharma will be his attendant. Attaining the Miraculous Display That Illumines All Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Sublime Splendor of Aggregated Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-five consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering twenty. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain twenty-three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1706 “The thus-gone Hitaiṣin will be born in a place called Form of Superior Fame. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine hundred leagues. Sage of Clear Mind will be his father. Showing the Symbol of the Body of the Sun will be his mother. Famed for Illuminating the Ways of Taking Birth will be his son. Adorned with Virtues will be his attendant. King of the Stainless Heap will be foremost in terms of insight. Remaining Undaunted by Means of All Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations of worthy ones, each of them gathering seven million. [231.a] The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain ninety-one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1707 “The thus-gone Jñānin will be born in a place called Splendidly Adorned with Wisdom. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Infinite Source of Wisdom will be his father. Displayer of All Forms of Acumen will be his mother. Roaring in the Lion Voice of the Royal Master of Melodies will be his son. Roar Adorned with the Splendor of the Sun will be his attendant. Dwelling Free from Dullness or Stains within the Home of Faith in Meditation will be foremost in terms of insight. Revealing the Gathering of the Invincible Indeterminate Array will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one million eight hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1708 “The thus-gone Yaśas will be born in a place called Full Realization through Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as forty worlds of four continents. Universally Superior Thought will be his father. Satisfying the Mind Mentally will be his mother. Acumen with Respect to All Symbols and Languages will be his son. Treasury of the Invincible Gathering will be his attendant. Lovely and Delightful Earrings from Mount Meru will be foremost in terms of insight. Perfectly Luminous Jewels will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering thirty-six billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1709 “The thus-gone Raśmijāla will be born in a place called Array of the Infinite Net of Jewels. [231.b] His family will be brahmin. His light will extend as far as fifty worlds of four continents. Intelligence That Reveals the Invincible Gathering will be his father. Splendid Intelligence That Tames the Enemy will be his mother. Worship of the Land of Wish-Fulfilling Milking will be his son. Mind of Inexhaustible Symbols and Language will be his attendant. Treasury Adorned with Jewel Nets will be foremost in terms of insight. Possessor of the Mind That Subdues Others with Diligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1710 “The thus-gone Vijita will be born in a place called King Free from Suffering. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Splendor of a Frolicking Lion will be his father. Endowed with Jewel Flowers will be his mother. King of the Source of Yogic Discipline will be his son. Illuminating Light Crest will be his attendant. Relinquishing All Flaws and Obscurations of Arrogance will be foremost in terms of insight. Mind of the Teacher of the Luminous Peak will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering two hundred seventy billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1711 “The thus-gone Vaiḍūryagarbha will be born in a place called Splendid Flashes of Highly Superior Illumination. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Light of the Essence of Jewels will be his father. Luminous Coral will be his mother. Crest of Supreme Excellence will be his son. Subjugator by Means of Stable Diligence will be his attendant. [232.a] Lion Who Bears the Garments of the Jewel Array will be foremost in terms of insight. Reveling in the Superknowledge of Seeing the Ten Directions will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1712 “The thus-gone Puṣpa will be born in a place called Adorned with Jewel Flowers. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty-four leagues. Illumination of All Precious Flowers will be his father. Splendid Aggregation Adorned with Precious Flowers will be his mother. Mind Free from Delusion will be his son. Powerful Action will be his attendant. Worship through the View of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. King of All Symbols and Language will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1713 “The thus-gone Devarāja will be born in a place called Array of the Sun of Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Adorned with Divine Faith will be his father. Precious Divine Essence will be his mother. Intent on Going Beyond the Lower Realms will be his son. Peak of Courage of Nonattachment will be his attendant. King of Superknowledge with Noble Awakening will be foremost in terms of insight. Intent on Bringing Satisfaction and Joy to All Beings of the World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. [232.b] His relics will be abundant.
$1714 “The thus-gone Śaśin will be born in a place called Delighting in Words. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Praised by the World will be his father. Clear Mind will be his mother. Supreme in the Entire World will be his son. King of Wisdom will be his attendant. Light of Famed Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Endowed with the Mind That Crosses the Entire Ocean of Existence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ten million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$1715 “The thus-gone Smṛtiprabha will be born in a place called Supreme Support for Donning the Robes of Mindfulness. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as fifty worlds of four continents. Intent on Seeing Countless Eons will be his father. Mind of the Equality of the Three Times will be his mother. Treasury of the Gathering of Jewels will be his son. Roar of Reveling by Means of the Qualities of the Buddhas will be his attendant. Dispelling Suffering and Attaining Undauntedness will be foremost in terms of insight. Array of Emanation by Means of All Learning will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one hundred consecutive congregations, each of them gathering thirty billion irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-two thousand years. In order to let all bodhisattvas mature, his sacred Dharma will remain for twelve thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$1716 “The thus-gone Kuśalaprabha
Will be born in a place called Expertise Regarding the World.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
$1717 “Excellent Mind will be his father, and Child of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Mind of Qualities will be his son and Wealth of Qualities his attendant. [233.a]
Crest of the Gathering of Qualities will be the one of intelligence
And Supreme Regarding All Qualities the one of miracles.
$1718 “There will be infinitely many consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
Who are irreversible with respect to awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
$1719 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has gone to the end of existence
Will remain for seventy-four thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling all of the realms.
$1720 “The buddha Sarva­vara­guṇa­prabha
Will be born in a place called Appearance of Miraculous Displays.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$1721 “Master of Light will be his father, and Gathering of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Qualities will be his son and Master of Qualities his attendant.
Ocean of Qualities will be the one of intelligence
And Abiding Master of Qualities the one of miracles.
$1722 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million incomparable ones
Who have gathered all qualities, attained nonappearance, and burned away the bonds.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
$1723 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for twenty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Three leagues large and beautifully decorated.
$1724 “The thus-gone Ratnaśrī
Will be born in a place called Gathering of Glory.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$1725 “Master of Fame will be his father, and Glorious Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Jewel will be his son and Jewel Glory his attendant.
Remaining Renown will be the one of insight
And Expert the one of miracles.
$1726 “Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
Who are immutable like majestic mountains.
When this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-eight thousand years.
$1727 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
With millions of stūpas filling the realms.
The thus-gone Manuṣyacandra
Will be born in a place called Adorned with the Moon.
$1728 “The family of this victor will be brahmin, [233.b]
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Excellent Worship will be his father, and Supreme Moon will be this victor’s mother.
Moon will be his son and Excellent Moon his attendant.
$1729 Countenance will be the scholar
And Beholding the World the one of miracles.
There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
$1730 “Who are free from grasping an ‘I’ and equal to space.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain
For thirty-seven thousand years.
$1731 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Adorned with thousands of supreme golden banners.
The protector of the world Rāhu will be born in a place
Called Stūpa for Demigods.
$1732 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Divine King will be his father, and Lady Who Rules the Demigods will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Wealth will be his son and Excellent Wealth his attendant.
$1733 “Joy in Abiding by the Training will be the scholar
And Free from the Fear of Enemies the one of miracles.
There will be twelve consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three billion
$1734 “Who delight in liberation through the cessation of craving.
The lifespan of humans will be ten thousand years,
And after the one who has reached the end of existence has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$1735 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Worshiped and venerated throughout the three realms.
The thus-gone Amṛtaprabha will be born
In a place called Illuminating Qualities.
$1736 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
Powerful will be his father, and Endowed with Faith will be this victor’s mother.
Donning the Armor will be his son and Training his attendant.
$1737 “Nectar Roar will be the scholar
And Instilling Faith in Meditators the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
$1738 “Vanquishers of all the māra-defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-one thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa [234.a]
$1739 “Twelve leagues large, shielded by golden canopies,
And adorned with ear ornaments of supreme jewels.
The well-gone Lokajyeṣṭha will be born
In a place called Endowed with Extremely Delightful Words.
$1740 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-three leagues.
Excellent Flower will be his father, and Flower of Royal Glory will be this victor’s mother.
Luminous Flower will be his son and Campaka his attendant.
$1741 “Endearing Flower will be the scholar
And Flower of Fearlessness the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
$1742 “Who have gone beyond attachment and have no concern about the world.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-five thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$1743 “Four leagues large, shielded by canopies of pearl,
And adorned with beryl ear ornaments.
The thus-gone Jyotiṣprabha will be born
In a place called Radiant Light.
$1744 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty leagues.
Master of Light will be his father, and Shining Light will be this victor’s mother.
Fire Gift#147 will be his son and Radiant his attendant.
$1745 “Flashing Splendor will be the one of intelligence
And Glory of Radiant Light the one of miracles.
There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred fifty million
$1746 “Who abide on the far side of the four rivers.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-eight thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this master of excellent qualities
Will remain for thirty-six thousand years.
$1747 “The relics of this victor will be abundant
And at night illuminated by thousands of butter lamps.
The thus-gone Śāntagati will be born
In a place called Worshiped by the Learned.
$1748 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-seven leagues.
Liberation will be his father, and Joy of the Worthy will be this victor’s mother.
Teacher will be his son and Excellent Virtue his attendant.
$1749 “Great Stūpa will be the one of intelligence
And No Fear of Attack the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
$1750 “Worthy ones free from the business of the world. [234.b]
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$1751 “Four leagues large and adorned with nets of great jewels
That blaze with infinite light.
The thus-gone Jñānasāgara will be born
In a place called Gathering of Wisdom.
$1752 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-three leagues.
Qualities will be his father, and Meaningful Wish will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Peace will be his son and Moon Ruler his attendant.
$1753 “Stūpa Chariot will be the scholar
And Endowed with Fearless Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
$1754 “Who have dried up the ocean of craving.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will still remain for one thousand years.
$1755 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling the realms with infinite light.
The Dharma lord, Parvatendra, will be born
In a place called Beautifully Decorated.
$1756 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father, and Divine Lady will be this victor’s mother.
Sandalwood will be his son and Excellent Fragrance his attendant.
$1757 “Jewel Mode will be the scholar
And Viewing the Dharma the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$1758 “Worthy ones who are free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
And for the benefit of wandering beings the sacred Dharma
Will remain for thirty-four thousand years.
$1759 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the fine stūpas will number two hundred twenty billion.
The protector of humanity, Praśānta, will be born
In a place called Renowned Light.
$1760 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Perfect Peace will be his father, and Joyful Calm Abiding will be this victor’s mother.
Giver of Peace will be his son and Master of Peace his attendant. [235.a]
$1761 “Pacifier of the Māras#148 will be the one of intelligence
And Serene Mental Faculties the one of miracles.
There will be sixteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred twenty million
$1762 “Who are free from the knots of adherence to existence.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-three thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years.
$1763 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Measuring five leagues and built of the seven precious substances.
The thus-gone Guṇabala will be born
In a place called Excellent Birth.
$1764 “His family will be brahmin,
And his superior light will extend seventy leagues.
Excellent Peak will be his father, and Luminous Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Qualities will be his son and Foremost Qualities his attendant.
$1765 “Leader Qualities will be the scholar
And Qualities of Clear Faculties the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million
$1766 “Worthy ones who abide free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And after the teacher has attained nirvāṇa his sacred Dharma
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
$1767 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Measuring seven leagues and adorned with supreme crests and canopies.
The well-gone Deveśvara will be born
In a place called Adorned with the Ruler.
$1768 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Great Rule will be his father, and Intelligence of Virtuous Rule will be this victor’s mother.
Recollecting the Words will be his son and Excellence of Universal Wealth his attendant.
$1769 “Crested Ruler Banner will be the one of intelligence
And Renowned Carefulness the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
$1770 “Who discard the bonds and nets.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
And after this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-six thousand years.
$1771 “His stūpa will measure eight leagues
And be decorated with nets of hundreds of jewels. [235.b]
The guide of humans, Mañjughoṣa, will be born
In a place called Melody Factors.
$1772 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Delightful Melody will be his father, and Delightful Tones will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme will be his son and Extremely Hard to Conquer his attendant.
$1773 “Master of Famed Qualities will be the one of intelligence
And No Fear of the World the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
$1774 “Whose family will be illustrious, just as their teaching will be.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who has transcended entities
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
$1775 “After this supreme human has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will reside in a single stūpa measuring thirty leagues.
The thus-gone Supārśva will be born
In a place called Illuminating Splendor.
$1776 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father, and Vessel of Firm Strength will be this victor’s mother.
Great Austerities will be his son and Endowed with Vision his attendant.
$1777 “Viewing the Positions will be the scholar
And Gift of the Lamp of the World the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
$1778 “Who are free from the three stains.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for seventy thousand years.
$1779 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Praised and worshiped by gods and humans.
The guide of humans Sthitārtha will be born
In a place called Intelligence That Reveals the Meaning.
$1780 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend five leagues.
Meaning Accomplished will be his father, and Meaningful Speech will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme will be his son and Endowed with the Mode his attendant.
$1781 “Accomplishing the Objectives of Wandering Beings will be the scholar
And Gift of the Lamp of the World the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion worthy ones
$1782 “Who abide in excellence, free from grasping an ‘I’ and with unwholesomeness purified.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years, [236.a]
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for thirty thousand years.
$1783 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Adorned with hundreds of thousands of stūpas.
The thus-gone Guṇatejas will be born
In a place called Source of All Excellent Qualities.
$1784 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
Excellent Form will be his father, and Splendid Light will be this victor’s mother.
Splendid Gift will be his son and Qualities of Splendor his attendant.
$1785 “Universal Worship will be the scholar
And Defeater of the Māras the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred sixty million worthy ones.
$1786 “The lifespan of humans
Will be twenty-seven thousand years,
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for thirty thousand years.
$1787 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Adorned with hundreds of thousands of stūpas.
The thus-gone Anuttarajñānin will be born
In a place called Illuminating Possession of Knowledge.
$1788 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
Excellent Gift of Worship will be his father, and Endowed with Wisdom will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Knowledge will be his son and Excellent Sacrifice his attendant.
$1789 “Master of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Liberation without Attachment the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$1790 “Who are free from the stains associated with craving.
The lifespan of humans will be one thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The single relic of this victor will reside in a stūpa
$1791 “That is thirteen leagues large
And adorned with hundreds of golden canopies.
The thus-gone Amitasvara will be born
In a place called Melodious Neighing.
$1792 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty leagues.
Delightful Melody will be his father, and Melody of Knowledge will be this victor’s mother.
Eightieth Million will be his son and Melodious his attendant. [236.b]
$1793 “Delightful Tones will be the scholar
And Destroyer of the Māras the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion of the able one’s worthy ones
$1794 “Who are endowed with supreme wisdom.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$1795 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in thousands of stūpas.
The holy being Sukhābha will be born
In a place called Beautifully Adorned with Light.
$1796 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Powerful will be his father, and Possessor of Great Splendor will be this victor’s mother.
Brahmā Gift will be his son and Land his attendant.
$1797 “Sunlight will be the scholar
And Fearless Mind the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
$1798 “Who are worshiped by fine gods of pure mind.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years.
$1799 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Victoriously filling the world for the benefit of its beings.
The one who is supreme in the world, Sumedhas, will be born
In a place called Gatherings of Awakening.
$1800 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Luminous will be his father, and Possessor of Radiant Splendor will be this victor’s mother.
Delightful Land will be his son and Excellent Sight his attendant.
$1801 “Crest of Equanimous Eyes#149 will be the one of intelligence
And Fearless Mind the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$1802 “Who grant the Dharma without concern for material things.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$1803 “That is four leagues tall
And studded with golden ornaments.
The thus-gone Vigata­mohārtha­cintin will be born [237.a]
In a place called Supreme Liberation.
$1804 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-three leagues.
Fine Excellence will be his father, and Doer of Good will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Excellence will be his son and Excellent Moon his attendant.
$1805 “Spreading the Fame of Excellent Qualities will be the scholar
And Destroyer of the Māras the one of miracles.
There will be ninety-one consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million of this able one’s worthy ones
$1806 “Who have shed their loads and achieved perfection.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-one thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
$1807 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and beautifully decorated.
The buddha Viśiṣṭa­svarāṅga will be born
In a place called Superior Illumination.
$1808 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
Supreme Roar will be his father, and Supreme Tones will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Mind of Reason his attendant.
$1809 “Pacifying Roar will be the scholar
And Superior Aspects of Melody the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred million
$1810 “Who have dispelled beliefs and are free from ignorance.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
$1811 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and ornamented with gold.
The victor Laḍitāgragāmin will be born
In a place called Praised in the World.
$1812 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father, and Lady Who Masters the Dharma will be this victor’s mother.
Liberator will be his son and Liberation his attendant.
$1813 “Stūpa of Qualities will be the scholar
And Luminous Liberation the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three billion
$1814 “Worthy ones who resemble the full moon.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years, [237.b]
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-six thousand years.
$1815 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Covered by golden canopies and encircled by banners.
The one who is supreme in the world, Śāntārtha,
Will be born in a place called Meaning Beyond Doubt.
$1816 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Splendid Ruler will be his father, and Splendid Light will be this victor’s mother.
Teacher will be his son and Excellent Land his attendant.
$1817 “Universal Worship will be the scholar
And Supreme Among All Qualities the one of miracles.
There will be eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred forty million
$1818 “Who cut through the web of business and craving.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa,
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-four thousand years.
$1819 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Magnetizing everyone in the trichiliocosm.
The lord of Dharma, Adoṣa,
Will be born in a place called Dispeller of All Flaws.
$1820 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Vast will be his father, and Supreme Divinity will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Powerful his attendant.
$1821 “Stūpa of Qualities will be the scholar
And Praised by Meditators the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$1822 “Who are identical to the one who is like a brimming lake.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this eliminator of attacks
Will remain for ninety-two thousand years.
$1823 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
One league large and adorned with thousands of canopies.
The well-gone Śubha­cīrṇa­buddhi
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Virtues.
$1824 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Excellent Mind will be his father, and Light of Virtue will be this victor’s mother.
Master of Retention will be his son and Victorious his attendant.
$1825 “Universal Worship will be the scholar
And Illuminating the World the one of miracles. [238.a]
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
$1826 “Who are all meditators free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And after this teacher has gone beyond appearance
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-four thousand years.
$1827 “For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
And will spread throughout and fill the three worlds.
The immaculate Padmakośa
Will be born in a place called Heap of Lotuses.
$1828 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-six leagues.
Excellent Lotus will be his father, and Lotus Glory will be this victor’s mother.
Great Compassion will be his son and Crest#150 his attendant.
$1829 “Holder of the Flower of Excellent Qualities will be the one of intelligence
And Craving the Supreme the one of miracles.
There will be thirteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million supreme worthy ones
$1830 “Who are free from the two extremes.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-four thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
$1831 “Residing in one hundred sixty billion stūpas
That are all made of the seven precious substances.
The one who is supreme in the world, Suraśmi,
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Radiance.
$1832 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
Great Light Rays will be his father, and Holding Joy and Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Lotus will be his son and Excellent Sight his attendant.
$1833 “Sound of the Absence of Attachment will be the one of intelligence
And Roaring Discussion the one of miracles.
There will be twenty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
$1834 “Who are free from attachment and shine like fire.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-five thousand years.
$1835 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
One hundred leagues large and shining with golden light.
The thus-gone Pratibhāna­varṇa
Will be born in a place called Colors of Acumen.
$1836 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will be infinite.
Great Being of Infinite Light will be his father, and Having Light Hues will be this victor’s mother. [238.b]
Supreme Jewel will be his son and Possessor of Knowledge his attendant.
$1837 “Melody of Acumen will be the one of intelligence
And Miraculous Display of Insight the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
$1838 “Meditators who are free from desire.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who delights in excellent qualities
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
$1839 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing six hundred billion stūpas.
The guide of humans, Sutīrtha,
Will be born in a place called Instiller of Faith in Noble Beings.
$1840 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-three leagues.
Great Objective will be his father, and Nectar Roar will be this victor’s mother.
Peace will be his son and Thorough Peace his attendant.
$1841 “Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Infinite Power the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
$1842 “Who remain for the sake of bringing the world happiness and help.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who delights in excellent qualities
Will remain for thirty-six thousand years.
$1843 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Thirteen leagues large and decorated with gold and billions of banners.
The ocean of qualities, Gaṇendra,
Will be born in a place called Adorned with the Ruler.
$1844 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-one leagues.
Joyous Ruler will be his father, and Relinquishment Endowed with Gathering will be this victor’s mother.
Instiller of Faith in Noble Beings will be his son and Gentle his attendant.
$1845 “Joy in Liberation will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith in the Truth the one of miracles.
There will be sixteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two million four hundred thousand
$1846 “Who have attained the fruition of no more training.
The lifespan of humans will be eighteen thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will also remain for eighteen thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$1847 Nine leagues large, decorated with pearl canopies,
And surrounded by thousands of golden banners. [239.a]
The thus-gone Vigatabhaya
Will be born in a place called Gift of Fearlessness.
$1848 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend sixty leagues.
Undaunted will be his father, and Nāga Light will be this victor’s mother.
Instiller of Joy will be his son and Power his attendant.
$1849 “Unimpaired will be the scholar
And Stūpa of Fearlessness the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$1850 “Who are free from the two extremes and beyond training.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for fourteen thousand years.
$1851 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling all the realms of the world.
The well-gone Jñānaruci
Will be born in a place called Proclamation of Wisdom.
$1852 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
Possessor of Excellent Knowledge will be his father, and Spontaneously Present Wisdom will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Knowledge will be his son and Powerful his attendant.
$1853 “Mountain of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Seeing Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred sixty million
$1854 “Who are like lotuses, unstained by existence.
The lifespan of humans will be fifteen thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
$1855 “Ten leagues large and studded with jewels,
Beautifully decorated and adorned with gold.
The thus-gone Pratibhāna­cakṣus
Will be born in a place called Seeing the World.
$1856 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-three leagues.
Excellent Eye will be his father, and Beautiful Eye will be this victor’s mother.
Remedy will be his son and Great Mind his attendant.
$1857 “Strength of the Essence of Acumen will be the one of intelligence
And Dwelling in Liberation the one of miracles.
There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two million two hundred thousand
$1858 “Who have attained the supreme fruition of the worthy ones. [239.b]
The lifespan of humans will be three thousand years,
And for the sake of the world the sacred Dharma
Will remain for one thousand years subsequent to nirvāṇa.
$1859 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Remaining complete within ten billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Varabuddhi
Will be born in a place called Gathering of the Mind.
$1860 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Excellent Mind will be his father, and Radiant will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Dharma will be his son and Excellent Dharma his attendant.
$1861 “Mind of Acumen will be the one of intelligence
And Mind of Excellent Accumulation the one of miracles.
One billion meditators who are worthy ones
Utterly free from the three stains
$1862 “Will gather for the sake of gods and humans.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-eight thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-six thousand years.
$1863 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues high and adorned with canopies everywhere.
The lord of Dharma, Candra,
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Light.
$1864 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Excellent Eye will be his father, and Moonlight will be this victor’s mother.
Peaceful will be his son and Divine King his attendant.
$1865 “Great Stūpa will be the scholar
And Praised by the World the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred million
$1866 “Who are all worthy ones free from mundane business.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-nine thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years.
$1867 “The relics of this victor of great compassion
Will be abundant and fill all the realms.
The thus-gone Ratnābhacandra
Will be born in a place called Crest of Intelligence.
$1868 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-three leagues.
Endowed with Light will be his father, and Divine Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Infinite will be his son and Delightful Countenance his attendant.
$1869 “Light Gift will be the one of intelligence
And Noble Diligence the one of miracles. [240.a]
There will be twenty-four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred billion
$1870 “Serene meditators who are free from dullness.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-five thousand years,
And when this supreme protector has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
$1871 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
One hundred leagues large and covered by canopies.
The protector of the world Abhaya
Will be born in a place called Gathering of Wisdom.
$1872 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
Powerful will be his father, and Worshiped by the World will be this victor’s mother.
Loving will be his son and Flawless his attendant.
$1873 “Powerful Qualities will be the scholar
And Fearless Mind the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
$1874 “Annihilators of the armies of the māras.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this victor
Will remain for ninety-six thousand years.
$1875 “To benefit gods and humans, the relics of this victor
 Will be abundant, filling the realms.
The thus-gone Mahādarśana
Will be born in a place called Viewing the World.
$1876 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-nine leagues.
Splendid Excellence will be his father, and Viewing the Moon will be this victor’s mother.
Intelligent will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
$1877 “Progress in Wisdom will be the scholar
And Viewing the Dharma the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
$1878 “Who are free from attachment and have gone beyond entities.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty thousand years,
And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
$1879 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
 Six leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
The thus-gone Brahmaruta
Will be born in a place called Stūpa Worship.
$1880 “His family will be brahmin, [240.b]
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
Excellent Brahmā will be his father, and Lady Who Masters the Dharma will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Invincible his attendant.
$1881 “Defeater of the Enemy will be the scholar
And Free from Mundane Fear the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
$1882 “Whose minds are liberated from the three realms and beyond training.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-six thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain complete for seventy thousand years.
$1883 “In order to bring happiness and improvement to gods and humans,
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
The one who is supreme in the world, Sughoṣa,
Will be born in a place called Attractive.
$1884 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Excellent Brahmā will be his father, and Famed Roar will be this victor’s mother.
Highest Peace will be his son and Excellent Peace his attendant.
$1885 “Joy of the Highest Peace will be the scholar
And Dwelling in Luminosity the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
$1886 “Worthy ones who abide for the benefit of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-six thousand years.
$1887 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
One hundred leagues large and studded with thousands of jewels.
The victorious Mahā­prajñā­tīrtha
Will be born in a place called Gathering of the World.
$1888 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Intelligent will be his father, and Supreme Insight will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Insight will be his son and Excellent Insight his attendant.
$1889 “Source of Insight will be the scholar
And Illuminating Insight the one of miracles.
There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
$1890 “Who are endowed with oceans of wisdom.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa [241.a]
$1891 “Thirty leagues large, made of gold,
And adorned with pearl canopies and golden decorations.
The thus-gone Asamabuddhi
Will be born in a place called Worshiped by the Learned.
$1892 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Excellent Center will be his father, and Stūpa of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Intelligent will be his son and Mindful his attendant.
$1893 “Light of Awakening will be the scholar
And Shining Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred sixty million
$1894 “Who have perfected the qualities free from delusion.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
And after this teacher of the truth has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
$1895 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the stūpas will number ninety billion.
The thus-gone Acalaprajñābha
Will be born in a place called Hard to Subdue.
$1896 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Inseparable will be his father, and Capable of the Impossible will be this victor’s mother.
Meditative Movement will be his son and Detached his attendant.
$1897 “Firm Strength will be the scholar
And Disentangled Mode the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eighty hundred forty million meditators
$1898 “Who have reached supreme peace.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa his sacred Dharma
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
$1899 “The stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will be eleven leagues large and studded with hundreds of jewels.
The thus-gone Buddhimati
Will be born in a place called Holder of Intelligence.
$1900 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Human will be his father, and Fragrant will be this victor’s mother.
Intelligent will be his son and Great Mind his attendant.
$1901 “Banner of Awakening will be the scholar [241.b]
And Gathering of Awakening the one of miracles.
There will be ninety-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred million
$1902 “Who have progressed to shed their loads.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$1903 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear eight hundred billion stūpas.
The supreme human, Drumendra,
Will be born in a place called Light of the Ruler.
$1904 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Ruler of Victors will be his father, and Gathering of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Excellent Light his attendant.
$1905 “Adorned with Qualities will be the scholar
And Fearless Child the one of miracles.
There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million.
$1906 “Additionally, there will be gatherings of eighty thousand.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite qualities
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
$1907 “For the sake of bringing help and happiness to gods and humans
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
The thus-gone Ghoṣasvara
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Lovely Melody.
$1908 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Thoroughly Joyous will be his father, and Supreme Seeing will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Victor will be his son and Endowed with Dharma his attendant.
$1909 “Nectar Roar will be the scholar
And Praised by Noble Beings the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$1910 “Serene worthy ones who are free from dullness.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who has gone beyond attachment
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
$1911 “The stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will be seventy-seven leagues large.
The thus-gone Puṇyabala
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Merit. [242.a]
$1912 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
Light of Merit will be his father, and Moon of Merit will be this victor’s mother.
Intelligent will be his son and Great Mind his attendant.
$1913 “Light of the Great Mind will be the one of intelligence
And Liberated Intelligence the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million
$1914 “Whose minds are completely free from attachment to existence.
The lifespan of humans will be eighteen thousand years,
And after this buddha has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
$1915 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in eight hundred billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Sthāmaśrī
Will be born in a place called Enduring Light.
$1916 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ninety-two leagues.
Excellent Power will be his father, and Lady of Powerful Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
True Abiding will be his son and Abiding Ruler his attendant.
$1917 “Abode of Wisdom will be the expert
And Excellent Presence of Power the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million worthy ones
$1918 “Who have all attained liberation.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-five thousand years.
$1919 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and made of gold.
The thus-gone Āryapriya
Will be born in a place called Instiller of Faith in the Sages.
$1920 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father, and Worship of the Worthy will be this victor’s mother.
Worship will be his son and Worship Possessor his attendant.
$1921 “Light of Noble Beings will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith in Noble Beings the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion [242.b]
$1922 “Who are free from the stains of the three defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$1923 “The blessed relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
The protector of the world, Pratapta,
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Qualities.
$1924 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father, and Divine Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Rāhu will be his son and Star his attendant.
$1925 “Adorned with Qualities will be the scholar
And Free from Mundane Fear the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
$1926 “Who have reached perfection with the four bases of miraculous power.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
$1927 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and adorned with golden top ornaments.
The buddha Jyotīrāma
Will be born in a place called Radiant Light.
$1928 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Divine Excellence will be his father, and Supreme Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Seer will be his son and Radiant his attendant.
$1929 “Leader Qualities will be the scholar
And Infinite Abiding the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
$1930 “Meditators who are like brimming seas.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
$1931 “In order to benefit gods and humans, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
The thus-gone Dundubhi­megha­svara
Will be born in a place called Nectar Melody.
$1932 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-two leagues.
Exquisite Excellence will be his father, and Delightful Tones will be this victor’s mother. [243.a]
Excellent Sight will be his son and Refined Joy his attendant.
$1933 “Qualities of Certainty will be the scholar
And Certain Dharma the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
$1934 “Worthy ones who are all free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this infinite tamer
Will remain for twenty-three thousand years.
$1935 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Six leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
The thus-gone Priya­cakṣurvaktra
Will be born in a place called Worship through Seeing.
$1936 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Excellent Eye will be his father, and Eye Gift will be this victor’s mother.
World will be his son and Detached his attendant.
$1937 “Seeing Qualities will be the scholar
And Famed Fearlessness the one of miracles.
There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
$1938 “Who have attained the fruition of excellent abiding by means of the supreme vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to cessation
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
$1939 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling thousands of realms.
The thus-gone Sujñāna
Will be born in a place called Lamp of Wisdom.
$1940 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Wisdom Meteor will be his father, and Powerful Lady of Wisdom will be this victor’s mother.
Knowledge Joy will be his son and Knowledge Wealth his attendant.
$1941 “Source of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Miraculous Display of Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million
$1942 “Who remain unshakable like the ring around the world.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for seventy thousand years.
$1943 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa [243.b]
One hundred leagues large and adorned with canopies.
The world’s teacher, Samṛddha,
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Jewels.
$1944 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
Intelligent will be his father, and Gathering of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Qualities will be his son and Qualities of Splendor his attendant.
$1945 “Holder of the Qualities of Splendor will be the scholar
And Worship through All Qualities the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
$1946 “Who are free from the web of attached engagements.#151
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-seven thousand years.
$1947 “For the benefit all beings in the three realms
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
The buddha Guṇarāśi
Will be born in a place called Source of All Good Qualities.
$1948 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Divine Miracle will be his father, and Miraculous Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Proclaim will be his son and Fierce his attendant.
$1949 “Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Supreme Lamp of Qualities the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million
$1950 “Who are unstained by the mud of the three worlds.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-eight thousand years,
And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy-eight thousand years.
$1951 “The single stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will be twelve leagues large and adorned with canopies of heavenly substance.
The world’s teacher, Prasanna,
Will be born in a place called Fearless Merit.
$1952 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Master of Fame will be his father, and Possessor of Divine Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Famed will be his son and Beautiful Moon his attendant. [244.a]
$1953 “Possessor of Divine Fame will be the one of intelligence
And Clear Fame the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
$1954 “Worthy ones who are rightly worshiped by the world.
The lifespan of humans will be seven hundred sixty million years,
And the sacred Dharma that is essential to sentient beings
Will remain for two hundred twenty million years.
$1955 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in stūpas made of the seven precious substances.
The thus-gone Dharmadhvaja
Will be born in a place called Gathering of Wisdom.
$1956 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty leagues.
Free from Suffering will be his father, and Jewel Banner will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Knowledge will be his son and Noble his attendant.
$1957 “Nectar Banner will be the scholar
And Famed Fearlessness the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
$1958 “Who are free from the eight worldly concerns.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years.
The stūpa with the relics of this victor
$1959 “Will be eleven leagues large
And adorned with seventy thousand parasols.
The buddha Jñānaruta
Will be born in a place called Enduring Wisdom.
$1960 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Supreme Qualities will be his father, and Radiant Leader will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Faction will be his son and Distinguished his attendant.
$1961 “Sound of Dharma will be the scholar
And Melody of Liberation the one of miracles.
There will be seventy-five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
$1962 “Worthy ones whose acts are guarded and insight free.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
And when this being of infinite renown has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$1963 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in ten billion stūpas. [244.b]
The one who is supreme in the world, Gagana,
Will be born in a place called Lamp of Splendor.
$1964 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend fourteen leagues.
Majestic Mountain will be his father, and Stable Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Unsupported will be his son and Unimpeded his attendant.
$1965 “Joyous Abiding will be the scholar
And Detached Abiding the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million
$1966 “Whose minds are completely liberated from existence.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years.
$1967 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
The buddha Yajñasvara
Will be born in a place called Illuminating the Teachings.
$1968 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend five leagues.
Lamp will be his father, and Melody of Excellent Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Honey will be his son and Beautiful Voice his attendant.
$1969 “Melody of Acumen will be the one of intelligence
And Infinite Supreme Melody the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
$1970 “Who have perfected the eight liberations.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of the one gone to peace
Will remain for ninety-two thousand years.
$1971 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear eight hundred billion stūpas.
The buddha Jñāna­vihāsa­svara
Will be born in a place called Supremely Joyous.
$1972 “The family of this well-gone one will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm.
Excellent Mind will be his father, and Sound of Certainty will be this victor’s mother.
Illuminator will be his son and God his attendant.
$1973 “Beautiful to Behold will be the scholar
And Illuminator the one of miracles.
There will be infinitely many congregations
As he will be surrounded by irreversible bodhisattvas [245.a]
$1974 “Who have accomplished retention.
The lifespan of humans will be eight hundred thousand years,
And to protect awakening his sacred Dharma
Will remain for eight hundred thousand years.
$1975 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling the realms and decorated with gold ornaments.
The buddha Guṇatejoraśmi
Will be born in a place called Endowed with All Excellent Qualities.
$1976 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Luminous Qualities will be his father, and Excellent Luminous Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Ocean of Qualities will be his son and Moon his attendant.
$1977 “Superior Moon will be the scholar
And Worship through Supreme Qualities the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
$1978 “Who have perfected all excellent qualities.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty thousand years,
And for the benefit of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$1979 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Worshiped and venerated by all beings.
The guide of humans, Ṛṣīndra,
Will be born in a place called Beheld by the Noble.
$1980 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
Luminous will be his father, and Noble Equality will be this victor’s mother.
Sage Gift will be his son and Superior Flower his attendant.
$1981 “Holder of the Qualities of Splendor will be the scholar
And Miraculous Display of Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering thirty billion
$1982 “Who dispel the names#152 and relinquish the knots.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this tamer of infinite beings
Will also remain for eighty thousand years.
$1983 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and studded with jewels.
The guide of humans, Matimat,
Will be born in a place called Beheld by the Astute.
$1984 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya, [245.b]
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Mindful will be his father, and Roar of Virtue will be this victor’s mother.
Flower will be his son and Expert his attendant.
$1985 “Leader Qualities will be the one of intelligence
And Infinite Wish to Benefit the one of miracles.
There will be one hundred consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
$1986 “Endowed with the mind that has relinquished existence.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And after this teacher who has attained nonappearance has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$1987 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear ninety billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Pratibhānagaṇa
Will be born in a place called Worship and Meditation.
$1988 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-three leagues.
Endowed with Realization will be his father, and Strength of Wisdom will be this victor’s mother.
Noble will be his son and Worthy his attendant.
$1989 “Heap of Qualities will be the scholar
And Source of the Qualities of Wisdom the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred million worthy ones
$1990 “Who delight in the supreme among beings.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
$1991 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and adorned with gold.
The one supreme in the world, Suyajña,
Will be born in a place called Luminous Sacrifice.
$1992 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-five leagues.
Excellent Sacrifice will be his father, and Roar of Liberation will be this victor’s mother.
Source of Merit will be his son and Victorious his attendant.
$1993 “Done with Certainty will be the scholar
And Fearless Strength the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
$1994 “Worthy ones who are all free from suffering.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for five thousand years. [246.a]
$1995 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And ten billion stūpas will enshrine them.
The thus-gone Candrānana
Will be born in a place called Divine Illumination.
$1996 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
Excellent Land will be his father, and Land of Light will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Sight will be his son and Wish to Benefit his attendant.
$1997 “Source of Flowers will be the scholar
And God of Illumination the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
$1998 “Who have attained liberation by means of the supreme vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety thousand years,
And after this teacher of infinite fame has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$1999 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and adorned with gold.
The thus-gone Sudarśana
Will be born in a place called Starlight.
$2000 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Majestic Mountain will be his father, and Limitless Light will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Lotus his attendant.
$2001 “Melody of Joy will be the scholar
And Luminous Supreme Qualities the one of miracles.
There will be ten consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$2002 “Who have become free from dullness by means of the supreme vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be three thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
$2003 “The stūpa with relics of this victor
Will be sixteen leagues large and adorned with gold.
The ocean of qualities, Viraja,
Will be born in a place called Endowed with All Qualities.
$2004 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
Ruler Qualities will be his father, and Holder of True Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Excellence will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
$2005 “Light of the Ten Powers will be the scholar
And Light of the Master of Gathering the one of miracles. [246.b]
There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred fifty million
$2006 “Meditators who are free from mundane concerns.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
$2007 “For the sake of beings, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
The thus-gone Guṇasañcaya
Will be born in a place called Supreme Fame.
$2008 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty leagues.
Luminous Qualities will be his father, and Holder of the Qualities of Splendor will be this victor’s mother.
Stūpa will be his son and Excellent Conduct his attendant.
$2009 “Beautiful Voice will be the scholar
And Moon of Fearlessness the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million worthy ones
$2010 “Who have attained supreme qualities.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
$2011 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and adorned with supreme banners.
The guide of humanity, Ketumat,
Will be born in a place called Illumination.
$2012 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Intelligent will be his father, and Eye of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Chariot of Fortune will be his son and Wealth his attendant.
$2013 “Light of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Jewel Light the one of miracles.
There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred twenty million
$2014 “Who have perfected supreme qualities.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
And after the one of infinite fame has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$2015 “The relics of this victor will be abundant
And adorned with supreme golden banners.
The thus-gone Puṇyadhvaja
Will be born in a place called Emanations of Wisdom.
$2016 “His family will be kṣatriya, [247.a]
And his light will extend seventy-two leagues.
Intelligent will be his father, and Accepting the View will be this victor’s mother.
Elixir will be his son and Excellent Brightness his attendant.
$2017 “Source of Dharma will be the scholar
And Facing the World the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred billion worthy ones
$2018 “Who are free from the business of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$2019 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Seven leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
The thus-gone Pratibhāna­rāṣṭra
Will be born in a place called Worshiped by the Learned.
$2020 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ninety-nine leagues.
Meaningful Qualities will be his father, and Meaningful Teaching will be this victor’s mother.
Seer will be his son and Excellent Sight his attendant.
$2021 “Ocean of Intelligence will be the scholar
And Supremely Distinguished the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million worthy ones
$2022 “Who benefit everyone with loving affection.
The lifespan of humans will be ten million forty thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
$2023 “For the benefit of wanderings beings the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
The buddha Ratnapradatta
Will be born in a place called Universal Illumination.
$2024 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
God of Wealth will be his father, and Ruler of Gods will be this victor’s mother.
Divine Joy will be his son and Divine his attendant.
$2025 “Nectar Melody will be the scholar
And Infinite Abiding the one of miracles.
There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
$2026 “Who have accomplished their deeds and reached peace.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$2027 “The stūpa with the relics of this victor [247.b]
Will be thirteen leagues large and adorned with gold.
The thus-gone Priyacandra
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Moon.
$2028 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
Detached will be his father, and Worshiped by the Heavens will be this victor’s mother.
Lotus will be his son and Endowed with Light his attendant.
$2029 “Supreme Wisdom will be the scholar
And Supreme Land the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred twenty million
$2030 “Who are just like the sky and do not grasp an ‘I.’
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
$2031 “For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant throughout the three realms.
The thus-gone Siṃhabala
Will be born in a place called Striding Lion.
$2032 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Beneficial Meaning will be his father, and Divine Worship will be this victor’s mother.
True Speech will be his son and Virtue his attendant.
$2033 “Luminous Mountain will be the scholar
And Infinite Abiding the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
$2034 “Who have vanquished the māras and the web of craving.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-six thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
$2035 “The relics of this victor will be abundant
And surrounded by golden banners.
The thus-gone Vaśavartirāja
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Merit.
$2036 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety leagues.
Yearning will be his father, and Holder of the Crest of Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Perfection of Mastery will be his son and Sacrifice his attendant.
$2037 “Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Illuminating Array the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
$2038 “Who have accomplished thorough training by means of the supreme path. [248.a]
The lifespan of humans will be fifteen thousand years,
And after this well-gone one has transcended suffering
His sacred Dharma will remain for fifteen thousand years.
$2039 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Adorned with golden gateways and canopies of pearls.
The thus-gone Amṛtaprasanna
Will be born in a place called Illuminating the World.
$2040 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
Fame Gift will be his father, and Nectar Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Luminous Qualities will be his son and Leader his attendant.
$2041 “Moving upon the Ground will be the scholar
And Perfectly Pure Abiding the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
$2042 “Who have mastered the supreme bases of miraculous power.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-five thousand years.
$2043 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Three leagues large and adorned with heaps of jewels and canopies.
The thus-gone Samadhyāyin
Will be born in a place called Beheld by the Noble.
$2044 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Excellent Melody will be his father, and Possessor of Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Excellence will be his son and Irreproachable his attendant.
$2045 “Abiding by the Training will be the scholar
And Sun Lamp the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred million
$2046 “Worthy ones, immutable and stainless.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-seven thousand years.
$2047 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eleven leagues large and studded with jewels.
The guide of humans, Akṣobhya,
Will be born in a place called Beheld by Love.
$2048 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-five leagues.
Divine Miracle will be his father, and Divine Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Divine Action will be his son and Excellent Youth his attendant. [248.b]
$2049 “Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Highly Trained Mind the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
$2050 “Worthy ones who have all tamed themselves.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-eight thousand years.
$2051 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And all realms will be filled with stūpas.
The thus-gone Praśāntamala
Will be born in a place called Light of Peace.
$2052 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
Thoroughly Peaceful will be his father, and Sense Control will be this victor’s mother.
Beauty will be his son and Excellent Peace his attendant.
$2053 “Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Merging with Liberation the one of miracles.
There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two billion
$2054 “Who have vanquished the māras and defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-seven thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirteen thousand years.
$2055 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and beautifully decorated.
The thus-gone Deśāmūḍha
Will be born in a place called Splendid Kumuda.
$2056 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-one leagues.
Dharma Meteor will be his father, and Seeing in All Directions will be this victor’s mother.
Splendid will be his son and Gimila his attendant.
$2057 “Powerful Qualities will be the scholar
And Relinquishment and Acumen the one of miracles.
There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred forty million
$2058 “Whose minds are entirely free from craving and attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-six thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
$2059 “For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this victor
Will reside be abundant, filling the realms.
The guide of humans, Laḍita,
Will be born in a place called Supreme Adornment.
$2060 “His family will be kṣatriya, [249.a]
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Divine King will be his father, and Light of the World will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Reaching Liberation his attendant.
$2061 “Adorned will be the scholar
And Abiding Power the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
$2062 “Who give up all the vast views without exception.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The single stūpa will be fifteen leagues large,
$2063 “Decorated with strands of gold and all kinds of jewels
And surrounded by hundreds of parasols.
The one supreme in the world, Suvaktra,
Will be born in a place called Regarded Well by the World.
$2064 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
Excellent Body will be his father, and Supreme Equality will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Intelligent his attendant.
$2065 “Lord of Humans will be the scholar
And Lamp of Excellent Training the one of miracles.
There will be eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred forty million
$2066 “Who remain for the sake of benefiting gods and humans.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-seven years,
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
$2067 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and adorned with gold.
The victorious Sthita­vega­jñāna
Will be born in a place called Excellent Accumulation of Merit.
$2068 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seven leagues.
Meaningful Qualities will be his father, and Meaningful Light will be this victor’s mother.
Superior in All Regards will be his son and Joyous his attendant.
$2069 “Understanding and Acceptance will be the scholar
And Lamp of Fame the one of miracles.
There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
$2070 “Who are blooming flowers of supreme qualities.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this being of infinite fame [249.b]
Will remain for twenty-two thousand years.
$2071 “The relics of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will fill the realms for the benefit of beings.
The one who is supreme in the world, Kathendra,
Will be born in a place called Supreme Master of Speech.
$2072 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
Chariot Ruler will be his father, and Light of the Noble will be this victor’s mother.
Joyous Fame will be his son and Merit his attendant.
$2073 “Strength of Virtue will be the scholar
And Supreme Dharma Roar the one of miracles.
There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
$2074 “Who are certain to attain supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$2075 “For the benefit of gods and humans, the abundant relics
Of this victor will fill the realms.
The incomparable Mahātejas
Will be born in a place called Revered by Gods.
$2076 “His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend twenty-four leagues.
Excellent Divine Substance will be his father, and Ruler of Gods will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Qualities will be his son and Renowned Qualities his attendant.
$2077 “Banner of Liberation will be the scholar
And Well-Considered Aims the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million worthy ones
$2078 “Who abide in the supreme fruition.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for fifteen thousand years.
$2079 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will be eight hundred billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Gambhīramati
Will be born in a place called Supreme Land.
$2080 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Famed Meaning will be his father, and Adorned with Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Qualities will be his son and Accomplished his attendant.
$2081 “Holder of the Qualities of Awakening will be the one of intelligence
And Worship and Praise the one of miracles.
There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations, [250.a]
Each of them gathering eighty million worthy ones
$2082 “Along with two million others.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-six thousand years,
And when this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
$2083 “The stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will be twelve leagues large and adorned with canopies of pearl.
The protector of the world, Amṛta,
Will be born in a place called Immeasurable Splendor.
$2084 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twelve leagues.
Infinite will be his father, and Infinite Roar will be this victor’s mother.
Kumuda will be his son and Seer his attendant.
$2085 “Joy for the World will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith in the World the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
$2086 “Holy people who have become worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirteen thousand years.
$2087 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear nine hundred billion stūpas.
The thus-gone Dharmabala
Will be born in a place called Crest Banner of Merit.
$2088 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
Excellent Brahmā will be his father, and Brahmā Stūpa will be this victor’s mother.
Sense Control will be his son and Peace his attendant.
$2089 “Illuminating Qualities will be the scholar
And Abiding by Supreme Qualities the one of miracles.
There will be ninety-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
$2090 “Immaculate ones who are free from the three stains.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite intelligence
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
$2091 “The stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will measure eleven leagues and be draped with jewel nets.
The thus-gone Pūjya
Will be born in a place called Accomplished with Merit.
$2092 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty leagues.
Moon Ruler will be his father, and Moon Crest will be this victor’s mother. [250.b]
Supreme will be his son and Gentle his attendant.
$2093 “Universal Worship will be the scholar
And Teacher of Wisdom and Merit the one of miracles.
There will be thirty-four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
$2094 “Meditating worthy ones whose minds are serene.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
$2095 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Seven leagues large and beautifully decorated.
The thus-gone Puṣpaprabha
Will be born in a place called Superior Splendor.
$2096 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eighty leagues.
Undaunted will be his father, and Realizer of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Universal Victory will be his son and Hard to Defeat his attendant.
$2097 “Master of Qualities will be the scholar
And Abiding in Highest Peace the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
$2098 “Superior worthy ones who are free from all wounds.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
And after this teacher of infinite fame has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$2099 “The relics of this victor will be numerous,
Filling all realms of the world.
The buddha Trailokyapūjya
Will be born in a place called Expanding Land.
$2100 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
Excellent Hand will be his father, and Lady of Virtues will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Eye Possessor his attendant.
$2101 “Joyous Melody of Insight will be the scholar
And Infinite Abode the one of miracles.
There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
$2102 “Who are certain to attain supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
$2103 “The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and adorned with beautiful canopies. [251.a]
The victorious Rāhu­sūrya­garbha
Will be born in a place called Vastly Superior World.
$2104 “The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will spread throughout the trichiliocosm.
Chariot Leading Ruler will be his father, and Sky Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Splendor will be his son and Endowed with Dharma his attendant.
$2105 “Stūpa of the Victorious Ones will be the scholar
And Supreme King the one of miracles.
There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred eighty million
$2106 “Who are certain to attain supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred million years,
And the sacred Dharma will remain
For eight hundred trillion years.
$2107 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling the entire trichiliocosm.
The thus-gone Marutpūjita
Will be born in a place called Divine Faith.
$2108 “The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
Excellent Crest will be his father, and Flower Light will be this victor’s mother.
Sandalwood will be his son and Campaka his attendant.
$2109 “Leader of Gods will be the scholar
And No Fear of Nāgas the one of miracles.
There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
$2110 “Who have trained well and are serene in the attainment of the elixir.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
$2111 “Also after this buddha has attained parinirvāṇa
His relics will abound for the benefit of the world.
The thus-gone Mokṣadhvaja
Will be born in a place called Instiller of Faith in the World.
$2112 “His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-nine leagues.
Excellent Support will be his father, and Buddha Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Knowledge will be his son and Excellent Knowledge his attendant.
$2113 “Supreme Golden Peak will be the scholar
And Distinguished Supreme Melody the one of miracles.
There will be eighty consecutive congregations, [251.b]
Each of them gathering eight hundred thirty million meditators
$2114 “Who are completely free of mundane concerns.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
And after this incomparable one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
$2115 “The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear nine hundred billion stūpas.
$2116 “The thus-gone Kalyāṇacūḍa will be born in a place called Delightful Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend two hundred leagues. Jewel Crest Banner will be his father. Supreme Lady of Glorious Excellence will be his mother. Excellent Sight will be his son. Sight of Merit will be his attendant. Clear Teacher will be foremost in terms of insight. Blooming Flowers of Excellent Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be five hundred million hearers; in the second there will be six hundred million; in the third, seven hundred million; in the fourth, eight hundred million; and in the fifth, nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2117 “The thus-gone Amṛtaprabha will be born in a place called View of Splendid Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Infinite Jewel Light will be his father. Liberation Joy will be his mother. Clear Teacher will be his son. Gift of Noble Faith will be his attendant. Splendid Gathering of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Vajra Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$2118 “The thus-gone Vajra will be born in a place called Hard to Tame. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten thousand leagues. Lion Gift will be his father. [252.a]Delightful Melody will be his mother. Stūpa of Qualities will be his son. Praised by the World will be his attendant. Luminous Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Attaining the Immaculate Stage will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering eighteen trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2119 “The thus-gone Dṛḍha will be born in a place called Unimpeded. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Accepting Relinquishment through Seeing will be his father. Liberation Joy will be his mother. Endowed with Unobscured Seeing will be his son. Light of the Conveying of True Teaching will be his attendant. Intelligence of Unobscured Teaching will be foremost in terms of insight. Attaining Renown throughout the Entire World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations of hearers, each of them gathering one hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$2120 “The thus-gone Ratnaskandha will be born in a place called Endowed with the Gathering of Qualities. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Worship of the Land will be his father. Divine Joy will be his mother. Wealth Gift Joy will be his son. Truly Superior Wisdom will be his attendant. Discerning All Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Teaching with Unimpeded Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. [252.b] His relics will be abundant.
$2121 “The thus-gone Laḍitakrama will be born in a place called Infinite Jewel Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-six thousand leagues. Jewel Crest Light will be his father. Clear Seeing will be his mother. Excellent in All Regards will be his son. Wish Delightful to Behold will be his attendant. Truly Superior Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. All-Seeing Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2122 “The thus-gone Bhānumat will be born in a place called Seeing Purity. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-two thousand leagues. Moon of Joy will be his father. Excellent Sight will be his mother. Joyous Light will be his son. Clear Teacher will be his attendant. Purifying the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Excellent Worship will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$2123 “The thus-gone Śuddhaprabha will be born in a place called Beautiful Mind. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Lion Jaws will be his father. Sight of Qualities will be his mother. Dharma Lamp will be his son. Intelligent Relinquishment through Seeing will be his attendant. Mountain Peak will be foremost in terms of insight. Well-Considered Aims will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations of hearers, [253.a] each of them gathering seven hundred sixty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2124 “The thus-gone Guṇacūḍa will be born in a place called Adorned with Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seventy-four leagues. Flower Lamp will be his father. Excellent Moon will be his mother. Divine Joy will be his son. Infinite Teacher will be his attendant. Clear Teacher Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Beautiful Joy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2125 “The thus-gone Anupamaśrī will be born in a place called Infinite Jewel Array. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Divine Brahmā will be his father. Brahmā Lady will be his mother. Supreme Jewel will be his son. Accepting Teacher will be his attendant. Stūpa will be foremost in terms of insight. Excellent Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$2126 “The thus-gone Siṃhagati will be born in a place called Crest of Luminous Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand four hundred leagues. Undaunted Power will be his father. Fearless Power will be his mother. Worshiped by the World will be his son. Stable Diligence will be his attendant. Unrelenting Diligence will be foremost in terms of insight. [253.b] Undefeatable Banner will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be seventy billion hearers; in the second there will be eighty billion; in the third, ninety billion; and in the fourth, one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2127 “The thus-gone Udgata will be born in a place called Infinite Array of Joy. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Divine Parasol will be his father. Nectar Flower will be his mother. Splendid Acumen will be his son. Flower of Wisdom will be his attendant. Light of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Aggregate of Liberation will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$2128 “The thus-gone Puṣpadatta will be born in a place called Flower Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three million leagues. God of the Flower of Qualities will be his father. Divine Flower will be his mother. Essence of Nectar will be his son. Shining Incense will be his attendant. Fame in the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Nectar Fame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eighty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty million years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2129 “The thus-gone Muktaprabha will be born in a place called Jewel Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twenty leagues. Clear Wealth Gift will be his father. Wisdom Gift will be his mother. [254.a]Sun Essence will be his son. Supreme Light will be his attendant. Source of Excellence will be foremost in terms of insight. Beautiful Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be one stūpa.
$2130 “The thus-gone Padma will be born in a place called Illuminating Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty thousand leagues. Worshiped by Gods will be his father. Wisdom Holder will be his mother. Expert Intelligence will be his son. Unimpeded Mind will be his attendant. Vajra Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Stūpa for Humanity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twelve consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be fourteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for three thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2131 “The thus-gone Jñānapriya will be born in a place called Flower of Liberation. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend six leagues. Wealth Gift will be his father. Gift of Excellent Relinquishment will be his mother. Melody of Joy will be his son. Infinite Array of Qualities will be his attendant. Supreme Moon of the Crest of Faith will be foremost in terms of insight. Light of Precious Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2132 “The thus-gone Laḍitavyūha will be born in a place called Array of Wisdom. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Array of Merit will be his father. [254.b] Auspicious Clarity will be his mother. Hand of Merit will be his son. Joyful Knowledge will be his attendant. Unshakable Powerful Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Ocean Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten million consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring twelve leagues.
$2133 “The thus-gone Amohavihārin will be born in a place called Stainless Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Precious Giving will be his father. Divine Light Rays will be his mother. Supreme Deity will be his son. Merging with Qualities will be his attendant. Flawless Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Aggregate of Liberation will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thirty thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2134 “The thus-gone Avraṇa will be born in a place called Source of All Excellent Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend four thousand leagues. Universal Light will be his father. Endowed with Truth will be his mother. Eye of Illumination will be his son. Universal Abiding will be his attendant. Powerful Conduct will be foremost in terms of insight. Renown of Infinite Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring fifteen leagues.
$2135 “The thus-gone Ketudhvaja will be born in a place called Radiant Crest. [255.a] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Crest of Merit will be his father. Truth Speaker will be his mother. Melody of Insight will be his son. Gathering of All Qualities will be his attendant. Supreme Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Endearing Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine million nine hundred thousand irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2136 “The thus-gone Sukhacittin will be born in a place called Blissful. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand two hundred leagues. King of Liberated Mind will be his father. Sense Control will be his mother. Ultimate Intelligence will be his son. Treasury of Liberation will be his attendant. Lion Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. The Meaning of Pure Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eighteen billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-eight thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2137 “The thus-gone Vimoharāja will be born in a place called Supreme Relinquishment. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixteen leagues. Divine Worship will be his father. Endowed with Excellence will be his mother. Great Strength will be his son. Perception of Power will be his attendant. Dwelling within the Full Gathering of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Dwelling in Beautiful Melody will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be one hundred thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring six leagues. [255.b]
$2138 “The thus-gone Vidhijña will be born in a place called Supreme Lamp. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Crest will be his father. Glorious Reasoning Mind will be his mother. Excellent Sight will be his son. Undaunted will be his attendant. Flower of Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Banner of Renown will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-five consecutive congregations, each of them gathering two million three hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for twenty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring seven leagues.
$2139 “The thus-gone Śuddhasāgara will be born in a place called Realization and Relinquishment. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Superior Merit will be his father. Sound Bearer Flower will be his mother. Powerful Mode will be his son. Glorious Excellence will be his attendant. Peak of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Indomitable will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2140 “The thus-gone Ratnadhara will be born in a place called Infinite Jewel. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty-four thousand leagues. Going Extremely High will be his father. Victorious Śāla Sound will be his mother. Divine Radiance will be his son. Moon Parasol will be his attendant. Supreme Jewel Crest will be foremost in terms of insight. Nectar Fragrance will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. [256.a] His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring thirteen leagues.
$2141 “The thus-gone Anavanata will be born in a place called Deathless. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five thousand leagues. Subduer of the Enemy will be his father. Luminous Countenance will be his mother. Beautiful to Behold will be his son. Infinite Splendor will be his attendant. Glorious will be foremost in terms of insight. Abandoning the Rivers will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2142 “The thus-gone Jagattoṣaṇa will be born in a place called Treasury of Riches. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Nāga Gift will be his father. Excellent Sight will be his mother. Stainless Mind will be his son. Beauty Accomplished will be his attendant. Radiant Wisdom will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Jewel will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering four million. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty-four thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring eleven leagues.
$2143 “The thus-gone Mayūraruta will be born in a place called Beautiful Melody. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as sixteen worlds of four continents. Light of Infinite Merit will be his father. Splendor of the Gathering of Merit will be his mother. King of Powerful Conduct will be his son. Sight of Worship will be his attendant. Intent on Accomplishing the Array of Beauty will be foremost in terms of insight. Crest of Supreme Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [256.b] There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering four hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2144 “The thus-gone Adīna will be born in a place called Indomitable. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Moon of Humanity will be his father. Excellent Light will be his mother. Seeing in All Directions will be his son. Ultimate Crest will be his attendant. Worshiped by Gods will be foremost in terms of insight. Infinite Crest will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty-four thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring ten leagues.
$2145 “The thus-gone Bhava­tṛṣṇā­mala­prahīṇa will be born in a place called Jewel Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three thousand six hundred leagues. Heap of Jewels will be his father. Shining Splendor will be his mother. Excellent Moon will be his son. Jewel of Supreme Fame will be his attendant. Enduring Splendor of the Immutable Mode will be foremost in terms of insight. Mind of Divine Faith will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one billion consecutive congregations, each of them gathering four hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain be abundant.
$2146 “The thus-gone Cāritratīrtha will be born in a place called Array of Worthy Ones. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten thousand leagues. Beauty will be his father. Sun Essence will be his mother. Supreme Moon will be his son. Array of Attractive Beauty will be his attendant. Dwelling in Immutable Perception will be foremost in terms of insight. King of the Splendor of Liberated Abandonment will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. [257.a] There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring sixteen leagues.
$2147 “The thus-gone Bahudevaghuṣṭa will be born in a place called Infinite Fame. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Joyous Divine Child will be his father. White Lotus Fragrance will be his mother. Splendid Lion Strength will be his son. Moon of Highest Glory will be his attendant. King of the Ornamented Array will be foremost in terms of insight. Child of Happiness will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering fifty-six billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2148 “The thus-gone Ratnakrama will be born in a place called Jewel Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred thousand leagues. Stainless Land will be his father. Jewel Crown will be his mother. Dharma Light will be his son. Supreme Melody will be his attendant. Joyous Worship by the World will be foremost in terms of insight. Flawless Jewel will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa, measuring fourteen leagues.
$2149 “The thus-gone Padmahastin will be born in a place called Infinite Jewel Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as fifty-four worlds of four continents. Beyond Abiding will be his father. Flawless Mind will be his mother. Splendid Shining Sun will be his son. Famed for Abiding in Diverse Joys will be his attendant. Lion Roarer will be foremost in terms of insight. [257.b] Joy of the Supreme Vehicle will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for forty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2150 “The thus-gone Śrī will be born in a place called Light of the King of Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend as far as a thousandfold world. Clear Intelligence and Merit will be his father. Divine Worship will be his mother. God of Infinite Splendor will be his son. Worshiped by the World in All the Cardinal and Intercardinal Directions will be his attendant. Moon of Humanity will be foremost in terms of insight. Light of Unfathomable Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-three consecutive congregations, each of them gathering twenty-two billion irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. In order to ripen everyone toward awakening, his sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$2151 “The thus-gone Jitaśatru will be born in a place called Indomitable Hue. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six thousand six hundred leagues. Well-Seen Moon will be his father. Joyous Worship of the Worthy will be his mother. Member of the Family of Supreme Wisdom will be his son. View and Mind will be his attendant. Lion Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Clear Infinite Fame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be innumerable congregations of bodhisattvas, who will not attain nirvāṇa before the very day they awaken to perfect and complete buddhahood. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-four thousand years. In order to ripen everyone toward awakening, his sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant, and there will be ten billion stūpas. [258.a]
$2152 “The thus-gone Samṛddhayaśas will be born in a place called Array of All Jewels. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand six hundred leagues. Supreme Jewel will be his father. Jewel Light of Qualities will be his mother. Wish to Worship will be his son. Ever Excellent will be his attendant. Jewel Crest Banner will be foremost in terms of insight. Intelligence of Meaningful Accomplishment will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2153 “The thus-gone Surāṣṭra will be born in a place called Endowed with Jewel Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty leagues. Well-Concealed Splendor will be his father. Flower Gift will be his mother. Strength of Merit will be his son. Possessor of Miraculous Power will be his attendant. Truth Crest will be foremost in terms of insight. Remaining Free from Delusion will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for twenty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2154 “The thus-gone Kusumaprabha will be born in a place called Heap of Flowers. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty-four thousand leagues. Foremost Human will be his father. Lovely Moonlight will be his mother. Seen through the View will be his son. Nectar Mind will be his attendant. Wisdom Leader will be foremost in terms of insight. Flower Relieving Suffering will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa. [258.b]
$2155 “The thus-gone Siṃhasvara will be born in a place called Indomitable Gathering. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five hundred leagues. Supreme Ground will be his father. Flower Light will be his mother. Lion Strength will be his son. Jewel Flower will be his attendant. Infinite Melody will be foremost in terms of insight. Crest of Supreme Excellence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twelve consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ten thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2156 “The thus-gone Candrodgata will be born in a place called Lightning Flash. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend forty-two thousand leagues. Beautiful to Behold will be his father. Sun Face will be his mother. Universal Beholding will be his son. Universal Flower will be his attendant. Powerful Strength of Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Vast Fame will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ten consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2157 “The thus-gone Damajyeṣṭha will be born in a place called Infinite Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-six leagues. Excellent Sandalwood will be his father. Supreme Jewel will be his mother. Glorious Jewel will be his son. Powerful Strength will be his attendant. View and Worship will be foremost in terms of insight. Infinite Jewel Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-five thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for twenty-five thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2158 “The thus-gone Acala will be born in a place called Abiding Mind. His family will be kṣatriya. [259.a] His light will extend seventeen thousand leagues. Divine Worship will be his father. Flower Bearer will be his mother. Supreme Wisdom will be his son. Endowed with Jewel Power will be his attendant. Lion Roarer will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Worship will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-three consecutive congregations, each of them gathering sixty billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-seven thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2159 “The thus-gone Upakāragati will be born in a place called Beheld by Lions. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Splendid Reasoning Mind will be his father. Jewel Light will be his mother. Joyous World will be his son. Nectar Lamp will be his attendant. Truth Speaker will be foremost in terms of insight. Relinquishment of the Subtle will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-four thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2160 “The thus-gone Puṇya­pradīpa­rāja will be born in a place called Nectar Fragrance. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend twelve thousand leagues. Source of Merit will be his father. Flower Crest will be his mother. Excellent Jewel will be his son. Infinite Jewel Array will be his attendant. Melody Gift will be foremost in terms of insight. Infinite Jewel Array will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will be abundant. [259.b]
$2161 “The thus-gone Svaracodaka will be born in a place called Delightful Melody. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend two thousand six hundred leagues. Lamp King will be his father. Great Splendor will be his mother. Famed Jewel will be his son. Mind Free from Delusion will be his attendant. Delightful Eye will be foremost in terms of insight. Merit Lamp will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2162 “The thus-gone Gautama will be born in a place called Splendid Sages. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend fourteen thousand leagues. Meditation Joy will be his father. Delightful will be his mother. Supreme Campaka will be his son. Nectar Flower will be his attendant. Powerful Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Donning the Armor of Firm Diligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eighteen billion. The extent of his lifespan will be forty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for forty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2163 “The thus-gone Ojobala will be born in a place called Delightful Sight. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighteen thousand leagues. Moon Crest will be his father. Luminous View will be his mother. Supreme Courage will be his son. Truth Friend will be his attendant. Excellent Power will be foremost in terms of insight. Delightful Gift will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-three thousand years. [260.a] His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-three thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2164 “The thus-gone Sthita­buddhi­rūpa will be born in a place called Sight of Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ninety-one leagues. Worshiped by Gods will be his father. Worshiped by Gods will be his mother. Truth Crest will be his son. Gift of Marks will be his attendant. Array of Offerings will be foremost in terms of insight. Excertion in Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fifty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2165 “The thus-gone Sucandra will be born in a place called Joyous World. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty leagues. Supreme Moon will be his father. Light Gift will be his mother. Glorious Jewel will be his son. Famed Qualities will be his attendant. Melody of Precious Qualities will be foremost in terms of insight. Leader Qualities will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven million seven hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-one thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-one thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2166 “The thus-gone Bodhyaṅgapuṣpa will be born in a place called Nectar Flower. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety thousand leagues. Flower of Wisdom will be his father. Dharma Flower will be his mother. Renowned Teacher will be his son. White Lotus of Liberation will be his attendant. Banner of Renown will be foremost in terms of insight. Infinite Insight will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-four thousand years. [260.b] His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2167 “The thus-gone Siddhi will be born in a place called Nothing Higher. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven thousand leagues. Excellent Sight will be his father. Leisurely Movement will be his mother. Lion’s Roar will be his son. Fierce Army will be his attendant. Wealth God will be foremost in terms of insight. Teacher Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ninety billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2168 “The thus-gone Praśasta will be born in a place called Teacher Worship. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight hundred thousand leagues. Famed Jewel will be his father. Vast Intelligence will be his mother. Sacrifice will be his son. Famed Splendor of Joy will be his attendant. Famed Splendid Jewel will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Lion Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy-seven consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2169 “The thus-gone Balatejojñāna will be born in a place called Indomitable Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will be immeasurable. Pain Gift will be his father. Moon of the World will be his mother. Sunshine will be his son. Splendid Wisdom will be his attendant. Sun of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Worship of Supreme Gods will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering two million five hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma [261.a] will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2170 “The thus-gone Kuśalapradīpa will be born in a place called Nectar Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Movement of Infinite Fame will be his father. Worthy Flower of Precious Splendor will be his mother. Moon of Divine Worship will be his son. Aggregate of Liberation will be his attendant. Truth will be foremost in terms of insight. Splendid Intelligence of the Truth will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering three hundred fifty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2171 “The thus-gone Dṛḍhavikrama will be born in a place called Hard to Dominate. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Moon Body will be his father. Focus on Liberation will be his mother. Great Fame will be his son. Reeds of the Melody of Joy will be his attendant. Banner of Enduring Fame will be foremost in terms of insight. Call of Gentle Melody will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2172 “The thus-gone Devaruta will be born in a place called Gift of Beauty. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Divine Worship will be his father. Excellent Perception of the Array will be his mother. Flower Intelligence will be his son. Splendid Brightness will be his attendant. Melody of Universal Joy will be foremost in terms of insight. Moon Absorption will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. [261.b] The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2173 “The thus-gone Praśānta will be born in a place called Universal Sound. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ninety-eight thousand leagues. Truth Speaker will be his father. Flower Lady will be his mother. Seven Splendid Jewels will be his son. Auspicious Nectar will be his attendant. Universal Perception will be foremost in terms of insight. Ever-Present Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-eight consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2174 “The thus-gone Sūryānana will be born in a place called Infinite Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-three thousand leagues. Protector will be his father. Leader Crest will be his mother. Delightful Melody will be his son. Unassailable Yogic Discipline will be his attendant. Excellent Abiding Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Vastly Superior to the World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering two hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2175 “The thus-gone Mokṣavrata will be born in a place called Banner of Fame. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one thousand leagues. Delightful Fame will be his father. Perception of Attested Signs will be his mother. Famed Great Sight will be his son. Blissful Splendid Intelligence will be his attendant. Single-Flavored Attention will be foremost in terms of insight. [262.a] Splendor That Vanquishes the Māra Hordes will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-nine thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2176 “The thus-gone Śīlaprabha will be born in a place called Free from the Unspeakable. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eighty-five thousand leagues. Mind of Lion-Like Yogic Discipline will be his father. Worship of Infinite Splendor will be his mother. Crest of Famed Worship will be his son. Universal Partaking of Qualities will be his attendant. Worship of Splendid Light will be foremost in terms of insight. Strength of Divine Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seven hundred million years. His relics will be abundant.
$2177 “The thus-gone Vratasthita will be born in a place called Worthy Relinquishment. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight hundred million leagues. Glory of Universal Splendor will be his father. Worship of Luminous Qualities will be his mother. Famed Flower Worship of Supreme Divinity will be his son. Famed Leader will be his attendant. Expanding Virtue Through Steady Progress will be foremost in terms of insight. Stūpa for Humanity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-one consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2178 “The thus-gone Arajas will be born in a place called Flawless. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-five thousand leagues. Precious Moon will be his father. [262.b]Excellent Crest will be his mother. Flower of Universal Preciousness will be his son. Gift of Greatness will be his attendant. Mass of Light of Infinite Splendor will be foremost in terms of insight. Sacrifice of the Strong Accomplishment of Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2179 “The thus-gone Sārodgata will be born in a place called Immutable Beauty. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Nectar Array will be his father. Famed Intelligence will be his mother. Dharma Banner will be his son. Even Land will be his attendant. Relinquishment of the Lower Realms will be foremost in terms of insight. Crest of Universal Light will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2180 “The thus-gone Añjana will be born in a place called Supreme Incense. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will cover infinite leagues. Fame of All Qualities will be his father. Gift of Delight will be his mother. Flower of Truth will be his son. Meritorious Intelligence will be his attendant. Flower of the Marks will be foremost in terms of insight. Immutable Array will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering thirty-two billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-two thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2181 “The thus-gone Vardhana will be born in a place called Supreme Circle. [263.a] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-four thousand leagues. Exquisite Excellence will be his father. Sight of Infinite Splendor will be his mother. Worshiped by the World will be his son. Thoroughly Hidden will be his attendant. Fame of Infinite Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Incomparable Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight million. The extent of his lifespan will be forty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2182 “The thus-gone Gandhābha will be born in a place called Nectar Fragrance. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend five thousand six hundred leagues. Subjugator of the Māras will be his father. Great Divinity of the Land will be his mother. Famed Wealth will be his son. Light of the Gift of the Noble will be his attendant. Immutable Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Melody of the Mind of Supreme Divinity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be eight hundred thousand hearers, in the second there will be nine hundred thousand, and in the third there will be one million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2183 “The thus-gone Velāmaprabha will be born in a place called Force of Discernment. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Supreme Fame will be his father. Lion’s Roar will be his mother. Universal Worship will be his son. Movement of the Sage’s Intelligence will be his attendant. Friend of Infinite Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Gift of Beauty will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one hundred thousand consecutive congregations, each of them gathering infinitely many irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant. [263.b]
$2184 “The thus-gone Smṛtīndra will be born in a place called Luminous Mountain of Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend twelve thousand leagues. Famed Power will be his father. Splendor of Nirvāṇa will be his mother. Comet of Dharma Light will be his son. Truth Crest will be his attendant. Endowed with Excellence will be foremost in terms of insight. Beyond the Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering twenty-five billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2185 “The thus-gone Asaṅgadhvaja will be born in a place called Infinite Ornament. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seventy thousand leagues. Power of the Moon’s Splendor will be his father. Light of Masses of Sun’s Splendor will be his mother. Divine Joy will be his son. Perfect Yogic Discipline and Famed Divine Worship will be his attendant. Mental Wealth will be foremost in terms of insight. Seeing with the Wisdom of Universal Divinity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2186 “The thus-gone Varabodhigati will be born in a place called Light of Wisdom. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seven hundred leagues. Merit Leader will be his father. Jewel Gift will be his mother. Roar of Bliss will be his son. Divine Awakening will be his attendant. Infinite Mind will be foremost in terms of insight. Universal Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be fourteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one million four hundred thousand. [264.a] The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighteen thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2187 “The thus-gone Caraṇaprasanna will be born in a place called Endowed with Conduct. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend nine thousand leagues. Divine Worship will be his father. Light of Wealth will be his mother. Jewel Crest Banner will be his son. Treasury of Limitless Jewels will be his attendant. Lamp of Insight will be foremost in terms of insight. Flower Wealth will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eleven consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty-seven thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2188 “The thus-gone Ratnapriya will be born in a place called Moonlight. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety leagues. King of the Lamp of Excellent Sight will be his father. Limitless Light will be his mother. Moon of Beauty will be his son. Supreme Intelligence will be his attendant. Leader Worthy of Worship will be foremost in terms of insight. Highly Renowned will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-nine consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2189 “The thus-gone Dharmeśvara will be born in a place called Banner of Merit. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Supreme Sound will be his father. Famed Intelligence will be his mother. Wealth of Wisdom will be his son. Worshiped by the World will be his attendant. Detached Relinquishment of Concepts will be foremost in terms of insight. [264.b] Strength of the Conduct of Lion Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eight hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2190 “The thus-gone Viśvadeva will be born in a place called Crest of Radiant Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Moon Sight will be his father. Delightful Flower will be his mother. King of the Ornament Array of Liberation will be his son. Crest of Joy in Liberation will be his attendant. Stable Power of Indomitable Strength will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Qualities and Renowned Acumen for Miraculous Display will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. In the first congregation there will be one hundred billion hearers; in the second there will be two hundred billion; in the third, five hundred billion; in the fourth, eight hundred million; and in the fifth, one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$2191 “The thus-gone Mahāmitra will be born in a place called Array of Infinite Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend six thousand six hundred leagues. Beyond the World will be his father. Supreme Lamp will be his mother. Acceptance of Excellent Sight will be his son. Limitless Mass of Splendor will be his attendant. Illuminating Light will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Worthy One will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nineteen billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. [265.a] There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2192 “The thus-gone Sumitra will be born in a place called Great Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty thousand leagues. Immutable Abiding will be his father. Wealth of Worship will be his mother. Liberation Joy will be his son. Essence of Nirvāṇa will be his attendant. Adornment of Fame will be foremost in terms of insight. Wealth of Joyous Lion Strength will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten quadrillion irreversible bodhisattvas. The extent of his lifespan will be eighteen thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2193 “The thus-gone Praśāntagāmin will be born in a place called Offering of Excellent Land. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty thousand leagues. Dharma Divinity will be his father. Royal Master of Delightful Melody will be his mother. Sense Control will be his son. Luminous Ground will be his attendant. Glory of Infinite Light will be foremost in terms of insight. Jewel Crest Banner will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred eighty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for fifty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2194 “The thus-gone Amṛtādhipa will be born in a place called Famed Relinquishment. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend sixty-six thousand leagues. Famed for Profundity will be his father. Worship of the Worthy will be his mother. Roar That Relinquishes Enemies will be his son. Famed Land will be his attendant. Glory and Fame of the World will be foremost in terms of insight. [265.b] Famed Divinity and Liberation will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2195 “The thus-gone Meruprabha will be born in a place called Rising Mountain. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred thousand leagues. Divine Flower will be his father. Famed Wealth will be his mother. Tiers of Liberation will be his son. Divine Radiance will be his attendant. Moon of the Gods will be foremost in terms of insight. Firm Mind will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be one billion consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be ten million years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$2196 “The thus-gone Āryastuta will be born in a place called Famed Intelligence. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety thousand leagues. Concealed Infinity will be his father. Garland of Fame will be his mother. Concealed Divinity will be his son. Famed Relinquishment will be his attendant. Worshiped by the Entire World will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Teacher will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighteen consecutive congregations, each of them gathering eighteen trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2197 “The thus-gone Jyotiṣmat will be born in a place called Splendid Hill. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight thousand leagues. Giving up Business will be his father. Supreme Gift will be his mother. Famed King will be his son. Vajra Power will be his attendant. Nectar Essence will be foremost in terms of insight. [266.a] Great Captain will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering sixty-seven billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2198 “The thus-gone Dīptatejas will be born in a place called Infinite Light. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend ten thousand leagues. Divine Bliss will be his father. Supreme Liberation will be his mother. Flower of Nirvāṇa will be his son. Renowned Detachment will be his attendant. Famed Freedom from Defilements will be foremost in terms of insight. Strength of Awakening will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering five hundred sixty million. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-two thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2199 “The thus-gone Avabhāsadarśin will be born in a place called Infinite Light. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ten million leagues. Vast Radiance will be his father. Delightful Splendor will be his mother. Nectar Array will be his son. King of Truth will be his attendant. Reveling with Superknowledge will be foremost in terms of insight. Strength of Awakening will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be eighty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-nine thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years. His relics will be abundant.
$2200 “The thus-gone Sucīrṇavipāka will be born in a place called Endowed with Clear Awakening. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend three hundred leagues. Land of Joy will be his father. Famed Nectar will be his mother. Divine Truth will be his son. [266.b] Gathering the World will be his attendant. Relinquishment through Seeing will be foremost in terms of insight. Infinite will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering four million two hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2201 “The thus-gone Supriya will be born in a place called Delightful Radiance. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty thousand leagues. Lord of the Water God will be his father. Superior Insight will be his mother. Strength of the Truth will be his son. Lion Gift will be his attendant. Supreme Radiance will be foremost in terms of insight. Worship and Relinquishment will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering thirty-two trillion. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2202 “The thus-gone Vigataśoka will be born in a place called Delightful Splendor. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend seventy-nine thousand leagues. Banner of Liberation will be his father. Flower of the Noble will be his mother. Thoroughly Concealed Qualities will be his son. Radiance of Wisdom will be his attendant. Divine Lamp will be foremost in terms of insight. Light of Masses of Excellence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be twenty-eight thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2203 “The thus-gone Ratnaprabhāsa will be born in a place called Fully Endowed with Qualities. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred leagues. Moon of Intelligence will be his father. Definitive Fame will be his mother. Nectar Eye will be his son. Jewel of Universal Renown will be his attendant. Famed as Irreproachable will be foremost in terms of insight. [267.a] Universal Wisdom will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-six thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2204 “The thus-gone Cāritraka will be born in a place called Stūpa for Humanity. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend seventy thousand leagues. Famed Jewel will be his father. Splendor of Mandāravā Flowers will be his mother. Joyful Excellent Sight will be his son. Clear Intelligence of Vast Vision will be his attendant. Concealed God of the Land will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Giving as Wished will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2205 “The thus-gone Puṇyabala will be born in a place called Support for Masses of Merit. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eight hundred million leagues. Famed Intelligence will be his father. Endowed with the Force of Compassion will be his mother. Mind of Dauntless Courage will be his son. Moon of the Gods will be his attendant. Splendid Jewel Adornment will be foremost in terms of insight. Famed Universal View will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine million. The extent of his lifespan will be fifty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2206 “The thus-gone Guṇasāgara will be born in a place called Lamp of Awakening. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm. Fame of Infinite Qualities will be his father. Famed Jewel will be his mother. Foremost in the City of Gods will be his son. Perfect Force and Stable Perception will be his attendant. [267.b] Calf of Delightful Sight will be foremost in terms of insight. Flawless Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be thirty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2207 “The thus-gone Caitraka will be born in a place called Engaging with the Objects of Worship. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend eighty leagues. Infinite Fame will be his father. Splendor of the Essence of the Sun will be his mother. Banner of Delightful Renown will be his son. Beneficial Mind will be his attendant. Scholar of Perfect Divine Substance will be foremost in terms of insight. Dominant Movement will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one hundred billion. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2208 “The thus-gone Mānajaha will be born in a place called Perfect Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend thirty-five thousand leagues. God of the Land will be his father. Crest of Meritorious Intelligence will be his mother. Infinite Light will be his son. Flower of Splendid Marks will be his attendant. Famed Lion Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Clear Supremacy will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering one million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be seventy thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2209 “The thus-gone Mārakṣayaṃkara will be born in a place called Array of Awakening. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one hundred thousand leagues. Concealed Jewel Splendor will be his father. King of the Fathomless Array will be his mother. Reveling Roar will be his son. [268.a] Mind of Infinite Love will be his attendant. Melodious Thunder will be foremost in terms of insight. Thundering Power will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-six consecutive congregations, each of them gathering six million six hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be thirty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2210 “The thus-gone Vāsanottīrṇa­gati will be born in a place called Unparalleled Array. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend one trillion leagues. Famed in the World will be his father. Excellent Intelligence will be his mother. Joy and Fame will be his son. Splendor of Famed Intelligence will be his attendant. Light of the Moon of Humanity will be foremost in terms of insight. Equal of the Master of Humanity will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering ten billion. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-seven thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2211 “The thus-gone Abhedyabuddhi will be born in a place called Certain Awakening. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend three thousand three hundred leagues. Splendid Wealth will be his father. Banner of Great Renown will be his mother. Splendor of the Banner will be his son. Impeccable Limbs will be his attendant. Jewel of Nectar will be foremost in terms of insight. Mind of Famed Intelligence will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be forty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering five hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2212 “The thus-gone Udadhi will be born in a place called Clear Joy. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend ninety-nine thousand leagues. [268.b] Star Crest will be his father. Famed Strength of Bliss will be his mother. Splendor of Carefulness will be his son. Learned Diligence will be his attendant. True Intelligence will be foremost in terms of insight. Royal Master of Fragrances will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine hundred forty million. The extent of his lifespan will be eighty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2213 “The thus-gone Śodhita will be born in a place called Adorned with Splendor. His family will be brahmin. His light will extend sixty-seven thousand leagues. Jewel Flower will be his father. Flower of Precious Qualities will be his mother. Famed Lion Intelligence will be his son. Remaining Immutable will be his attendant. Glorious Essence of the Moon will be foremost in terms of insight. Reveling with Superknowledge will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be seventy consecutive congregations, each of them gathering four hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be forty-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2214 “The thus-gone Gaṇimuktirāja will be born in a place called Best of Jewels. His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend fifty thousand leagues. Mind Missing Nothing will be his father. Universal Jewel will be his mother. Flower Splendor will be his son. Salty Gift will be his attendant. Conqueror of the Craving of Existence will be foremost in terms of insight. Fathomless Grasp will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be sixty consecutive congregations, each of them gathering seven hundred million. The extent of his lifespan will be sixty-three thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-three thousand years. His relics will remain in a single collection. There will also only be a single stūpa.
$2215 “The thus-gone Priyābha will be born in a place called Partaking of Awakening. [269.a] His family will be kṣatriya. His light will extend thirty-eight thousand leagues. Delightful Splendor will be his father. Gorgeously Roaring Lion Voice will be his mother. Pure Countenance will be his son. Famed Worship will be his attendant. Nectar Garden will be foremost in terms of insight. Concern for the World will be foremost in terms of miraculous abilities. There will be ninety-four consecutive congregations, each of them gathering nine million nine hundred thousand. The extent of his lifespan will be ninety-four thousand years. His sacred Dharma will also remain for ninety-four thousand years. His relics will be abundant.
$2216 “The well-gone Bodhidhvaja
Will be born in a place called Illuminating the Dharma.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
$2217 “Exquisite Excellence will be his father, and Water God Worship will be this victor’s mother.
Medicine will be his son and Hero his attendant.
Universal Worship will be the scholar
And Remaining Free from Delusion the one of miracles.
$2218 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Who do not apprehend an ‘I’ within the three realms of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-five thousand years,
$2219 “And the sacred Dharma of this supreme leader
Will remain for seventy-four thousand years.
The stūpa with the relics of this victor
Will be sixteen leagues large and adorned with gold.
$2220 “The guide of humanity, Jñānaratna,
Will be born in a place called Universal Adornment.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend five hundred leagues.
$2221 “Supreme Excellence will be his father, and Supreme in the World will be this victor’s mother.
Wish for Liberation will be his son and Moon his attendant.
Joyous in All Regards will be the scholar
And King of Leaders the one of miracles.
$2222 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million worthy ones
For whom there is no ‘I’ and who are free from hypocrisy.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$2223 “And when this teacher has gone to peace his sacred Dharma
Will remain for seventy-six thousand years. [269.b]
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in eight hundred billion stūpas.
$2224 “The guide of humanity, Suśītala,
Will be born in a place called Famed Wisdom.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-two leagues.
$2225 “Excellent Brahmā will be his father, and Light of Wisdom will be this victor’s mother.
Divinity will be his son and Intelligence his attendant.
Even Possession of Wisdom will be the one of intelligence
And Famed Fearlessness the one of miracles.
$2226 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Worthy ones who have gone beyond.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$2227 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and adorned with banners.
$2228 “The protector of the world, Brahmarāja,
Will be born in a place called Well Purified.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2229 “Endowed with Mindfulness will be his father, and Light of Virtue will be this victor’s mother.
Eye will be his son and Fame his attendant.
Ocean of Qualities will be the scholar
And Famed Fearlessness the one of miracles.
$2230 “There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Worthy ones who are free from the stains of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$2231 “And for the benefit of wandering beings
The sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-four thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
One hundred leagues large and adorned with gold.
$2232 “The buddha Jñānarata
Will be born in a place called Light of All Qualities.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eight hundred leagues.
$2233 “Master of Yogic Discipline will be his father, and Masterful Light will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Illuminator his attendant.
Stable Power will be the scholar
And Universal Leader the one of miracles. [270.a]
$2234 “There will be sixty-two congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thirty million
Who are perfectly trained upon the supreme path.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
$2235 “And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in eight hundred billion stūpas.
$2236 “The victor Ṛddhiketu
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Merit.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eight hundred leagues.
$2237 “Master of Wealth will be his father, and Famed Merit will be this victor’s mother.
Definitively Excellent Merit will be his son and Endowed with Dharma his attendant.
Leader Qualities will be the scholar
And Superior Abiding the one of miracles.
$2238 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred seventy billion
Unblemished worthy ones who are free from pretense.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-three thousand years,
$2239 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite fame
Will remain for ninety-one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Ten leagues large and adorned with tens of millions banners.
$2240 “The thus-gone Janendrakalpa
Will be born in a place called Victorious Light.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend sixty leagues.
$2241 “Radiant Sacrifice will be his father, and Gathering of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Virtue will be his son and Excellent Virtue his attendant.
Holder of Qualities will be the scholar
And Luminous Qualities the one of miracles.
$2242 “There will be sixty-three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Serene one who are free from delusion and attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-eight thousand years,
$2243 “And when this attainer of liberation has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in seventy billion stūpas.
$2244 “The thus-gone Dharaṇīśvara
Will be born in a place called Excellent Abiding.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten million leagues. [270.b]
$2245 “Meaningful Abiding will be his father, and Enduring Mind of Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Awakening will be his son and Excellent Awakening his attendant.
Lord of Humans will be the scholar
And Meaningful Diversity the one of miracles.
$2246 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
Who have perfected teaching and meditation.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$2247 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite fame
Will remain for twenty-one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And fine stūpas will fill the three realms.
$2248 “The thus-gone Sūryapriya
Will be born in a place called Gathering of Splendor.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$2249 “Master of Learning will be his father, and Masterful Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Abiding his attendant.
Supreme Soldier will be the scholar
And Definitive Fame the one of miracles.
$2250 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Who are entirely unstained by existence.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$2251 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Seven leagues large and endowed with golden canopies.
$2252 “The well-gone Rāhucandra
Will be born in a place called Illuminator of Crests.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
$2253 “Excellent Crest will be his father, and Endowed with Light will be this victor’s mother.
Splendor will be his son and Illuminating Endowment his attendant.
Great Possession of Fame will be the scholar
And Abiding Free from Suffering the one of miracles.
$2254 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Fearless ones who reside on the other side of the great plain.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2255 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-eight thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant, [271.a]
And fine stūpas will fill the three realms.
$2256 “The thus-gone Puṣpaprabha
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Flowers.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2257 “Master of Qualities will be his father, and Stūpa Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Victor will be his son and Benefactor his attendant.
Supreme in the World will be the scholar
And King of Power the one of miracles.
$2258 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred billion
Liberated ones who are free from dullness.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty thousand years,
$2259 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher free from attachment
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Nine leagues large and studded with millions of jewels.
$2260 “The thus-gone Vaidyādhipa
Will be born in a place called Suffering Dispelled.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2261 “Free from Suffering will be his father, and View of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Sustainer will be his son and Fearless his attendant.
Merit Joy will be the scholar
And Roaring like a Lion the one of miracles.
$2262 “There will be infinitely many congregations,
Each of them gathering ten trillion
Irreversible ones who all have accomplished retention.
The lifespan of humans will be ten billion years,
$2263 “And in order to ripen beings for awakening
The sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And adorned with thousands of jewels and flowers.
$2264 “The thus-gone Ojodhārin
Will be born in a place called Delightful View
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten million leagues.
$2265 “Endowed with Wealth will be his father, and Endowed with Wisdom will be this victor’s mother.
Liberated will be his son and Free from Attachment his attendant.
Sound of Thunder will be the scholar
And Mode of Lucid Strength the one of miracles.
$2266 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Who attain awakening by means of the supreme vehicle. [271.b]
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-three thousand years,
$2267 “And in order to ripen beings for awakening
The sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
There will appear a stūpa of twelve leagues
Studded with a billion jewels.
$2268 “The thus-gone Puṇyapriya
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Merit.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend as far as a trichiliocosm.
$2269 “Radiant will be his father, and Nectar Light will be this victor’s mother.
Medicine will be his son and Excellent Medicine his attendant.
Light of Awakening will be the scholar
And Loving Mind the one of miracles.
$2270 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred billion
Who have attained retention and are supported by awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be six hundred thirty thousand years,
$2271 “And in order to ripen beings for awakening
The sacred Dharma will also remain for six hundred thirty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant
And adorned with thousands of golden banners.
$2272 “The thus-gone Ratibala
Will be born in a place called Satisfying Offerings.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will have immeasurable reach.
$2273 “Reasoning Mind will be his father, and Benevolent Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Wish to Benefit will be his son and Moon his attendant.
Vast Intelligence will be the scholar
And Golden Light the one of miracles.
$2274 “Irreversible ones who have attained retention
And are the equals of Mañjuśrī
Will gather in infinite congregations.
The lifespan of humans will be three hundred twenty thousand years,
$2275 “And in order to ripen beings for possession of the supreme vehicle
The sacred Dharma will, upon the teacher’s nirvāṇa,
Remain for one hundred twenty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2276 “The incomparable Sughoṣa
Will be born in a place called Supreme Light.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2277 “Excellent Virtue will be his father and Light of Fearlessness will be this victor’s mother. [272.a]
Insight will be his son and Great Knowledge his attendant.
Crest Banner will be the scholar
And Infinite Abiding the one of miracles.
$2278 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven million three hundred thousand
Worthy ones who have gathered virtue.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
$2279 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone beyond entities
Will remain for seventy-three thousand years.
The stūpa with the relics of this victor
Will be thirteen leagues large and adorned with canopies of pearl.
$2280 “The thus-gone Dharmeśvara
Will be born in a place called Sound of Liberation.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend two thousand leagues.
$2281 “Great Ruler will be his father, and Gathering of Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Sight will be his son and Virtue his attendant.
Nectar Light will be the scholar
And Wealth Lamp the one of miracles.
$2282 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten trillion
Who are a single life away from awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$2283 “And in order to ripen beings for awakening
The sacred Dharma will remain for six million years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a stūpa
Eleven leagues large and shining with golden light.
$2284 “The thus-gone Brahmaruta
Will be born in a place called Melody and Light.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2285 “Powerful will be his father, and Jewel Light will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Victor will be his son and Astrologer his attendant.
Lion Mode will be the scholar
And Merit Circle the one of miracles.
$2286 “There will be twelve consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
Noble ones who have attained deliverance in the supreme abode.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
$2287 “And after this teacher who brings an end to existence has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will, for the benefit of the world,
Remain for sixty thousand years. [272.b]
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2288 “The heart of sentient beings, Suceṣṭa,
Will be born in a place called Excellent Stūpa.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend five hundred leagues.
$2289 “Moonlight will be his father, and Splendid Light will be this victor’s mother.
Certainty will be his son and Perfection his attendant.
Beautiful Eye will be the scholar
And Observance of Tremendous Discipline the one of miracles.
$2290 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who are patient and highly disciplined and have attained supreme calm abiding.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$2291 “And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling all of the realms.
$2292 “The thus-gone Askhalita­buddhi
Will be born in a place called Light of the World.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm.
$2293 “Endowed with Mindfulness will be his father, and Royal Leader Endowed with the Gathering will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Dharma will be his son and Excellent Dharma his attendant.
Delightful Melody will be the scholar
And Miraculous Display of Liberation the one of miracles.
$2294 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Who are certain to attain awakening by means of the supreme vehicle.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-three thousand years,
$2295 “And in order to ripen beings for awakening
The sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Seven leagues large and decorated with beautiful arrays.
$2296 “The thus-gone Mahāpraṇāda
Will be born in a place called Famed by Gods.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ninety-two leagues.
$2297 “Excellent Flower will be his father, and Famed Strength will be this victor’s mother.
Qualities of Joy will be his son and Endowed with Perfection his attendant.
Brahmā Melody will be the scholar
And Insight and Excellent Attention the one of miracles.
$2298 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations, [273.a]
Each of them gathering two hundred fifty million
Worthy ones for whom there is no ‘I’ and are free from delusion.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
$2299 “And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-three thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the stūpas will be adorned with the seven precious substances.
$2300 “The thus-gone Yaśaḥkīrti
Will be born in a place called World of Joyous Qualities.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-three leagues.
$2301 “Wish to Benefit will be his father, and Wish for Awakening will be this victor’s mother.
Irreproachable will be his son and Proclaimer his attendant.
Nectar Intelligence will be the scholar
And Lamp of Freedom from Attachment the one of miracles.
$2302 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three million four hundred thousand
Who vanquish the māras and the web of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2303 “And when this teacher has gone beyond entities
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Nine leagues large and beautifully decorated.
$2304 “The protector of the world, Ketumat,
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Radiance.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$2305 “Divine Ruler will be his father, and Melody of Liberation will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme Moon will be his son and Heroic Mind his attendant.
Flower Light will be the scholar
And Miraculous Acumen the one of miracles.
$2306 “There will be twenty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred seventy million
Who are free from the stains of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-six thousand years,
$2307 “And when this teacher has gone to supreme peace
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-six thousand years.
There will be nine hundred sixty thousand stūpas
Adorned with billions of banners.
$2308 “The victorious Vighuṣṭatejas
Will be born in a place called Melody of Liberation.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten million leagues.
$2309 “Qualities of Wealth will be his father, and Star Owner will be this victor’s mother. [273.b]
Flower will be his son and Patience his attendant.
Proclaimer of Qualities will be the scholar
And Roar of the Teaching of Truth the one of miracles.
$2310 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ninety hundred billion
Who conquer all māras and defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-seven thousand years,
$2311 “And when this teacher has perfected liberation
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-two thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa of one hundred leagues
That is adorned with nets of hundreds of jewels.
$2312 “The buddha Jagadīśvara
Will be born in a place called Illuminating Liberation.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend eight hundred leagues.
$2313 “Terrifying will be his father, and Divine Light will be this victor’s mother.
Helper will be his son and Power his attendant.
Delightful Splendor will be the one of intelligence
And Free from Attachment and Dullness the one of miracles.
$2314 “There will be five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten trillion
Worthy ones who are free from the plagues.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-four thousand years,
$2315 “And when this teacher has perfected exhaustion
His sacred Dharma will also remain for sixty-four thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Adorned with thousands of jewels and encircled by banners.
$2316 “The protector of the world, Druma,
Will be born in a place called Instilling Faith in Liberation.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-nine leagues.
$2317 “Excellent Fragrance will be his father, and Ruling Light will be this victor’s mother.
Happy Joy will be his son and Fierce his attendant.
Divine Fame will be the scholar
And Unsurpassable Intention the one of miracles.
$2318 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred fifty million
Worthy ones who have gone beyond the divine abodes.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$2319 “And when this teacher has gone to cessation
His sacred Dharma will remain for four thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa
Nine leagues large and adorned with supreme banners and crown jewels.
$2320 “The victorious Supraṇaṣṭamoha [274.a]
Will be born in a place called Skillful Illumination.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2321 “Distinguished will be his father, and Splendid Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Chariot of Joy will be his son and Cloud Bearer his attendant.
Shining Crest will be the scholar
And Supreme Sound the one of miracles.
$2322 “There will be thirty-three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred twenty million
Who have sunk the banner of pride in the sea.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-seven thousand years,
$2323 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-four thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
Filling the realms to the benefit of beings.
$2324 “The heart of sentient beings, Amita,
Will be born in a place called Inexhaustible Treasury.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend eight hundred million leagues.
$2325 “Excellent Hand will be his father, and Pure Light will be this victor’s mother.
Rāhula will be his son and Divine Ruler his attendant.
Powerful Strength will be the scholar
And Universal Luminosity the one of miracles.
$2326 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Ocean-like possessors of the treasury of learning.
The lifespan of humans will be fifty thousand years,
$2327 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for eleven thousand years.
His immaculate stūpa will be eight leagues large,
Decorated with tassels of hundreds of jewels,
And adorned with precious nets.
$2328 “The thus-gone Sucandra
Will be born in a place called Moonlight.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2329 “Lamp will be his father, and Divine Light will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Divinity will be his son and Steadfast his attendant.
Powerful Strength will be the scholar
And Supreme King the one of miracles.
$2330 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Worthy ones who have fulfilled their wishes.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years, [274.b]
$2331 “And after this achiever of liberation has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
His relics will be abundant,
Filling the realms for the benefit of beings.
$2332 “The buddha Ananta­pratibhāna­ketu
Will be born in a place called Leader of the Land.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2333 “Meaningful Qualities will be his father, and Endowed with Meaning will be this victor’s mother.
Truth Gift will be his son and Excellent Wealth his attendant.
Delightful Sight will be the scholar
And Luminous Array the one of miracles.
$2334 “There will be infinite congregations,
Each of them gathering innumerable millions
Of those certain to attain supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$2335 “And after this well-gone one has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seven hundred thousand years.
His relics will be abundant
And accompanied by the seven precious substances.
$2336 “The thus-gone Vratanidhi
Will be born in a place called Wish-Fulfilling.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend eight hundred leagues.
$2337 “Shining Qualities will be his father, and Light of Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Brahmin will be his son and Endearing his attendant.
Elephant Character will be the scholar
And Superior Abiding the one of miracles.
$2338 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering ten billion
Who abide auspiciously with immutable minds.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
$2339 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-seven thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and decorated with tassels of precious jewels.
$2340 “The incomparable Pūjya
Will be born in a place called Supreme Land.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend five hundred leagues.
$2341 “Excellent Crest will be his father, and Indubitable Deeds will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Fortune will be his son and Hard to Conquer his attendant.
Joy of Wisdom will be the scholar [275.a]
And Famed throughout the Land the one of miracles.
$2342 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Who delight in the fruition of serenity beyond training.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-three thousand years,
$2343 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Twelve leagues large and decorated with jewel tassels.
$2344 “The thus-gone Uttīrṇaśoka
Will be born in a place called Constant Joy.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ninety-two leagues.
$2345 “Great Sage will be his father, and Ultimate Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Demigod will be his son and Deity his attendant.
Crest of Fame will be the scholar
And Dwelling in Liberation the one of miracles.
$2346 “There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Who have gone beyond the realms of the gods.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$2347 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone beyond entities
Will remain for thirty-four thousand years.
When this victorious one has attained nirvāṇa
The relics of his great compassion will be abundant.
$2348 “The thus-gone Kṣemapriya
Will be born in a place called Delightful Joy.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2349 “True Yogic Discipline will be his father, and Virtuous Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Eye will be his son and Brahmā Gift his attendant.
Lion’s Roar will be the scholar
And Dragon Voice the one of miracles.
$2350 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million,
As well as six million others.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$2351 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
The stūpa with the relics of this victor
Will be five leagues large and made of the seven precious substances.
$2352 “The thus-gone Jagadmati [275.b]
Will be born in a place called Divine Light.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will have unfathomable reach.
$2353 “Complete Awakening will be his father, and Lady Who Masters the Dharma will be this victor’s mother.
Worship will be his son and Astrologer his attendant.
Fathomless Light will be the scholar
And Infinite Presence of Meaning the one of miracles.
$2354 “There will be eighty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one hundred billion
Who are free from the eight worldly concerns.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2355 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Seven leagues large and covered by canopies.
$2356 “The thus-gone Priyaṅgama
Will be born in a place called Perfect Presence of Jewels.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2357 “Excellent Companion will be his father, and Supreme Love will be this victor’s mother.
Worship will be his son and Excellent Ruler his attendant.
Clear Intelligence will be the scholar
And Towering Sight the one of miracles.
$2358 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred thirty million noble ones
Who have reached perfect freedom from dullness.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
$2359 “And the sacred Dharma of this teacher of infinite fame
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the three realms filled with fine stūpas.
$2360 “The thus-gone Caraṇābhijñāta
Will be born in a place called Lamp of the World.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2361 “Excellent Fragrance will be his father, and Supreme Fragrance will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Fragrance will be his son and Flower his attendant.
Worthy of Worship will be the scholar
And Renowned for Excellence in Practice the one of miracles.
$2362 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
Who are unshakable like the king of mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years, [276.a]
$2363 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Adorned with thousands of the finest golden banners.
$2364 “The protector of the world, Utpala,
Will be born in a place called Heap of Flowers.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend innumerable millions of leagues.
$2365 “Wish to Benefit will be his father, and Moon Orbit will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Crest Possessor his attendant.
Moonlight will be the scholar
And Melody of the Teaching of the Truth the one of miracles.
$2366 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred million
Who are free from the world’s inopportune states.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
$2367 “And the sacred Dharma will remain
For eighty-five thousand years.
The stūpa of this victor will be ten leagues large
And surrounded by a thousand golden banners.
$2368 “The thus-gone Puṣpa­dama­sthita
Will be born in a place called Jewel Lamp.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy-three leagues.
$2369 “Excellent Moon will be his father, and Lotus Light will be this victor’s mother.
Lion will be his son and Wealth his attendant.
Stūpa of Qualities will be the scholar
And Luminous Array the one of miracles.
$2370 “There will be sixty-five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
Meditators who have attained the eight liberations.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years.
$2371 “His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor
Will reside in a single stūpa thirteen leagues large
And decorated with jewel nets.
$2372 “The well-gone Ananta­pratibhāna­raśmi
Will be born in a place called Striding Lion.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2373 “Great Being will be his father, and Fierce Yogic Discipline will be this victor’s mother.
Joy of Liberation will be his son and Qualities his attendant. [276.b]
Supreme Joy will be the scholar
And Luminous Jewel the one of miracles.
$2374 “There will be fifty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred million
Who have attained lion-like fearlessness.
The lifespan of humans will be fourteen thousand years,
$2375 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And the three realms filled with jewels.
$2376 “The thus-gone Ṛṣiprasanna
Will be born in a place called Praised by the Noble.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seven thousand leagues.
$2377 “Lamp will be his father, and Divine Banner will be this victor’s mother.
Power will be his son and Great Power his attendant.
Praised by the Worthy will be the scholar
And Enduring Array the one of miracles.
$2378 “There will be twenty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty billion
Whose minds have gone completely beyond existence.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
$2379 “And when this teacher of infinite fame has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And all realms will be filled with stūpas.
$2380 “The buddha Guṇavīrya
Will be born in a place called Radiant Jewel Qualities.
His family of this victor will be kṣatriya
And his light will extend three thousand leagues.
$2381 “Excellent Peace will be his father, and Benevolent Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Meditator will be his son and Thoroughly Peaceful his attendant.
Lotus Light will be the scholar
And Array of Beauty the one of miracles.
$2382 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering
Nine million nine hundred thousand worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$2383 “And the sacred Dharma will remain
For ninety-eight thousand years.
The stūpa of this victor will be thirteen leagues large
And surrounded by standards of beryl. [277.a]
$2384 “The protector of the world, Sāra,
Will be born in a place called Powerful Intelligence.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$2385 “Brahmā Light will be his father, and Light of Peace will be this victor’s mother.
Cloud Bearer will be his son and Hand Movement his attendant.
Source of Nectar will be the scholar
And Diverse Ripening the one of miracles.
$2386 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million,
Along with one million six hundred thousand others.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2387 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone beyond attachment
Will also remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And stūpas will fill the realms.
$2388 “The thus-gone Marudadhipa
Will be born in a place called Luminous World.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm.
$2389 “Divine Excellence will be his father, and Divine Moon will be this victor’s mother.
Deity will be his son and Universal Victor his attendant.
Strength of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Lamp of Fame the one of miracles.
$2390 “There will be infinite congregations,
Each of them gathering ten trillion
Irreversible bodhisattvas.
The lifespan of humans will be twelve thousand years,
$2391 “And for the sake ripening beings toward awakening
The sacred Dharma will remain for one hundred twenty million years.
His relics will be abundant,
And there will appear three hundred billion stūpas.
$2392 “The thus-gone Uccaratna
Will be born in a place called Delightful to Behold.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred thousand leagues.
$2393 “Intelligent will be his father, and Ruler of Humanity will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Sight will be his son and Royalty his attendant.
Mode of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Enduring Fame the one of miracles.
$2394 “There will be sixty-eight consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering sixty billion
Who are free from the imprints of defilement. [277.b]
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-five thousand years,
$2395 “And the sacred Dharma will also remain
For sixty-five thousand years.
The stūpa containing his relics will be one hundred leagues large
And surrounded by jewel lotuses.
$2396 “The thus-gone Prasanna
Will be born in a place called Instilling Faith in the Gods.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty-one leagues.
$2397 “Power will be his father, and Moonlight will be this victor’s mother.
Fearless will be his son and Detached his attendant.
Moving like the Wind will be the scholar
And Freedom from Doubt the one of miracles.
$2398 “There will be twenty-four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million,
Along with five trillion others.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$2399 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
For the benefit and happiness of gods and humans
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2400 “The thus-gone Bhāgīratha
Will be born in a place called Instilling Faith in the Truth.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2401 “Enduring Ruler will be his father, and Objective of the Noble will be this victor’s mother.
Instiller of Faith will be his son and Hero his attendant.
Nectar Light will be the scholar
And Enriched Existence the one of miracles.
$2402 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering five billion worthy ones
Who have exhausted the contaminants.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
$2403 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who attained nirvāṇa
Will also remain for sixty-six thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa
Three leagues large and surrounded by golden banners.
$2404 “The heart of sentient beings, Puṇyamati,
Will be born in a place called Instilling Faith in the Gods.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one billion leagues. [278.a]
$2405 “Wish to Benefit will be his father, and Listening to the Noble will be this victor’s mother.
Gentle will be his son and Excellent Form his attendant.
Mode of Merit will be the scholar
And Universal Lamp the one of miracles.
$2406 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one trillion
Who have all pacified arrogance and haughtiness.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-one thousand years,
$2407 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
The fine stūpas will number seven hundred thousand
And be decorated with arrays of hundreds of jewels.
$2408 “The protector of the world, Hutārci,
Will be born in a place called Shining Stūpa.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2409 “Excellent Flower will be his father, and Lady of Śāla Trees will be this victor’s mother.
Moon Possessor will be his son and Endowed with Peace his attendant.
Delightful to Behold will be the scholar
And Melody of Excellent Sight the one of miracles.
$2410 “There will be twelve consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Who are certain to attain awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be fifty-five thousand years,
$2411 “And when this teacher has gone beyond entities
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty million years.
So that beings may mature toward awakening,
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2412 “Ananta­guṇa­tejorāśi will be born
In a place called Source of Qualities.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend fifty-six leagues.
$2413 “Divine Ruler will be his father, and Mode of Liberation will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Radiant his attendant.
Roar of Loving Kindness will be the scholar
And Wish for the Divine Palace the one of miracles.
$2414 “There will be twenty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred forty million
Who remain majestically unshakable, like the king of mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
$2415 “And when this teacher has gone beyond appearances
His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa [278.b]
Fifteen leagues large and exquisitely adorned.
$2416 “The thus-gone Siṃhavikrāmin
Will be born in a place called Worship through Seeing.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$2417 “Wish to Benefit will be his father, and Light of the Child of the Wealth God will be this victor’s mother.
Crest Possessor will be his son and Radiant his attendant.
Lion Intelligence will be the scholar
And Melodious Teaching the one of miracles.
$2418 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred thirty million
Who are certain to attain the factors of supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$2419 “And in order to ripen beings toward awakening
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
Residing in thousands of stūpas adorned in infinite ways.
$2420 “The protector of the world, Acala,
Will be born in a place called Abiding Merit.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one billion leagues.
$2421 “Meaningful Qualities will be his father, and Ruler of Gods will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Light will be his son and Excellent Light his attendant.
Adornment Gift will be the scholar
And Superior Lamp the one of miracles.
$2422 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred twenty million
Worthy ones who are immersed in peace.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$2423 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for twenty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Rising one league tall
And decorated with precious gems and golden tassels.
$2424 “The protector of the world, Prasanna,
Will be born in a place called Fearless Seeing.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$2425 “Light of Praise will be his father, and Luminous will be this victor’s mother.
Demigod will be his son and Royal Gift his attendant.
Mode of the Worthy Ones will be the scholar
And Unobscured Crest the one of miracles.
$2426 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred forty million
Meditators free from all stains. [279.a]
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-one thousand years,
$2427 “And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear one trillion stūpas.
$2428 “The thus-gone Cīrṇaprabha will be born
In a place called Constant Joy.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend sixty leagues.
$2429 “Free from Intoxication will be his father, and Supreme Merit will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Divinity will be his son and Observant his attendant.
Supreme Merit will be the scholar
And Undisturbed Rest the one of miracles.
$2430 “There will be thirteen consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Meditators who are free attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-four thousand years,
$2431 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for thirteen thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large, adorned with ornaments,
And featuring a jewel summit.
$2432 “The thus-gone Nāgaruta will be born
In a place called Offered by Nāgas.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2433 “Vast will be his father, and Nāga Melody will be this victor’s mother.
Miracle will be his son and Lion his attendant.
Worship through Joy will be the scholar
And Teacher the one of miracles.
$2434 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
Who have attained the supreme divine abodes.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$2435 “And the sacred Dharma of the one free from attachment
Will remain for eighty thousand years.
After this victor of great compassion has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant.
$2436 “The thus-gone Saṃgīti will be born
In a place called Supreme Melody.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues. [279.b]
$2437 “Intelligent will be his father, and Virtuous Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Loving Kindness will be his son and Excellent Companion his attendant.
Leaving the River Behind will be the scholar
And Definitive Splendor the one of miracles.
$2438 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Meditators who are like incomparable water.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2439 “And when this teacher has gone to the ends of existence
His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years.
His stūpa will be adorned with jewels
And decorated with beautiful banners.
$2440 “The thus-gone Cakradhara will be born
In a place called Invincible Army.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$2441 “Divine Ruler will be his father, and Light of the Victorious Gathering will be this victor’s mother.
Wealth will be his son and Given by the Gods his attendant.
Invincible Light will be the scholar
And Superior Array the one of miracles.
$2442 “There will be twelve consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Worthy ones who are like an even ocean of liberation.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$2443 “And when this teacher has perfected liberation
His sacred Dharma will also remain for thirty-six thousand years.
After this being of great compassion has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant.
$2444 “The thus-gone Vasuśreṣṭha will be born
In a place called Adorned Limbs.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten thousand leagues.
$2445 “Wish to Benefit will be his father, and Light of Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Moon will be his son and Moonlight his attendant.
Free from Darkness will be the scholar
And Abiding by Freedom from Attachment the one of miracles.
$2446 “There will be eleven consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Powerful gods who delight in liberation.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-one thousand years,
$2447 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. [280.a]
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Thirteen leagues large and adorned with gold canopies.
$2448 “The buddha Lokapriya will be born
In a place called Bright Light.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$2449 “Ocean will be his father, and Divine Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Man will be his son and Child his attendant.
Great Fame will be the scholar
And Famed Leader the one of miracles.
$2450 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred million
Who liberate beings from doubt and indecision.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$2451 “And for the benefit of the world
The sacred Dharma will remain for eighty-four thousand years.
When this incomparable being has attained nirvāṇa
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2452 “The well-gone Dharmacandra will be born
In a place called Dharma Teaching.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$2453 “Skillful will be his father, and Stable Insight will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Divinity will be his son and Steadfast his attendant.
Abiding of Enduring Dharma will be the one of insight
And Diversely Abiding Truth the one of miracles.
$2454 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred million
Who dwell in comprehensive knowledge of the sacred Dharma.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$2455 “And after this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2456 “The buddha Ananta­rati­kīrti will be born
In a place called Divine Light.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2457 “Excellent Divinity will be his father, and Divine Light will be this victor’s mother.
Ground Possessor will be his son and Delighter his attendant.
Delightful Tone will be the scholar
And Force of Bliss the one of miracles.
$2458 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations, [280.b]
Each of them gathering two hundred forty million
Who achieve liberation from all defilements.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$2459 “And when this teacher has gone beyond entities
The sacred Dharma will remain for one thousand years.
When this being of great compassion has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant.
$2460 “The thus-gone Meghadhvaja will be born
In a place called Dharma Illumination.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred thousand leagues.
$2461 “Luminous Qualities will be his father, and Ocean of Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Insight Gift will be his son and Excellent Insight his attendant.
Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Excellent Steps to Nirvāṇa the one of miracles.
$2462 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Who have perfected the abodes of Brahmā.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
$2463 “And when this teacher has gone beyond entities
The sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
When this knower of the world has attained nirvāṇa,
His relics of will be abundant.
$2464 “The thus-gone Prajñāgati will be born
In a place called Merging with Wisdom.
His family of will be brahmin
And his light will extend three thousand six hundred leagues.
$2465 “Excellent Steps will be his father, and Insight Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Supreme will be his son and Cloud Bearer his attendant.
Māra Conqueror will be the one of intelligence
And Infinite Abiding the one of miracles.
$2466 “There will be eighty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty million
Who have gone to the far side of supreme awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2467 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
The sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Five leagues large and adorned with jewel canopies.
$2468 “The protector of the world, Sugandha,
Will be born in a place called Adorned with Fragrance.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues. [281.a]
$2469 “Exquisite Excellence will be his father, and Excellent Light will be this victor’s mother.
Astrologer will be his son and Wealth his attendant.
Excellent Light of Qualities will be the scholar
And Infinite Array the one of miracles.
$2470 “There will be thirty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
Who are like lakes expanding into the sea.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-four thousand years,
$2471 “And when this teacher has perfected peace
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-four thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and decorated throughout.
$2472 “The thus-gone Gaganasvara
Will be born in a place called Miraculous Illumination.
The family of this immaculate one will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend as far as the trichiliocosm.
$2473 “Bliss Ruler will be his father, and Melody of Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Flower will be his son and Kumuda his attendant.
Lion Banner will be the scholar
And Supreme Melody the one of miracles.
$2474 “There will be infinitely many congregations,
Each of them gathering infinitely numerous millions
Of steadfast bodhisattvas committed to awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be three billion years,
$2475 “And for the sake of ripening beings toward awakening
His sacred Dharma will remain for three billion years.
When this victor of infinite fame has attained nirvāṇa
His relics will be abundant.
$2476 “The protector of the world, Deva,
Will be born in a place called Embodiment of the Natural State.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend as far as a millionfold world.
$2477 “Lamp will be his father, and Intelligent Acumen will be this victor’s mother.
Divine Clarity will be his son and Winner his attendant.
Excellent Eye will be the scholar
And Highly Purified Body the one of miracles.
$2478 “There will be sixty-four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred billion
Supreme sentient beings who wish for awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred thousand years,
$2479 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty million years. [281.b]
After this giver of sight has attained nirvāṇa,
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2480 “The thus-gone Devarāja
Will be born in a place called Worshiped by Gods.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend as far as a thousandfold world.
$2481 “Excellent Divinity will be his father, and Ruler of Gods will be this victor’s mother.
Deity will be his son and Deity his attendant.
Brahmā Superior will be the scholar
And Foremost Ruler of Gods the one of miracles.
$2482 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred forty thousand
Who have attained retention and wish for awakening.
The lifespan of humans will be nine hundred ninety billion years,
$2483 “And in order to ripen beings toward awakening
His sacred Dharma will remain for eight hundred thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And fine stūpas will fill the realms.
$2484 “The thus-gone Maṇiviśuddha
Will be born in a place called Clear Jewels.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten thousand leagues.
$2485 “Luminous will be his father, and Supreme Jewel will be this victor’s mother.
Joyous will be his son and Excellent Sight his attendant.
Beautiful Eye will be the scholar
And Constant Seeing the one of miracles.
$2486 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred thirty million
Worthy ones free from contaminants.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
$2487 “And the sacred Dharma of this perfecter of cessation
Will also remain for seventy-four thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa one hundred leagues large
And decorated with beautiful tassels of gold and jewels.
$2488 “The thus-gone Sudhana
Will be born in a place called Merit Adornment.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine thousand leagues.
$2489 “Highly Virtuous will be his father, and Banner of Liberation will be this victor’s mother.
Teacher of the Peak will be his son and Victor his attendant.
Roar of Wisdom will be the scholar
And Remaining in Beauty the one of miracles.
$2490 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Who do not perceive self but bring existence to exhaustion. [282.a]
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$2491 “And after this teacher has passed away
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-four thousand years.
His relics of this victor will be abundant,
Filling all of the realms.
$2492 “The incomparable Pradīpa
Will be born in a place called Lamp of Merit.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three thousand leagues.
$2493 “Subjugator will be his father, and Splendid Light will be this victor’s mother.
Splendid Gift will be his son and Lamp his attendant.
Lamp Maker will be the scholar
And Illuminator of the World the one of miracles.
$2494 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering
Seven hundred thousand worthy ones.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-one thousand years,
$2495 “And after this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
In order to benefit the world, his relics will be abundant
And adorned with nets of hundreds of jewels.
$2496 “The victorious Ratna­svara­ghoṣa
Will be born in a place called Endowed with Melody.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred thousand leagues.
$2497 “Divine Body will be his father, and Jewel Mode will be this victor’s mother.
Royal Gift will be his son and Traverser his attendant.
Eliminator of Pride will be the scholar
And Dispeller of Defilements#153 the one of miracles.
$2498 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred twenty million
Who correctly perfect the Dharma.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2499 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and decorated with millions of jewels.
$2500 “The victorious Janendrarāja
Will be born in a place called Fierce Illumination. [282.b]
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2501 “Distinguished will be his father, and Ocean Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Ocean will be his son and Great Ocean his attendant.
Nectar Joy will be the scholar
And Excellent Steps to Nirvāṇa the one of miracles.
$2502 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred thirty million
Serene ones who have gone beyond entities and are undeluded.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-one thousand years,
$2503 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has given up the stains
Will also remain for sixty-one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And fine stūpas will fill the realms.
$2504 “The thus-gone Rāhugupta
Will be born in a place called Bright Lamp.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$2505 “Miraculous Qualities will be his father, and Miraculous Light will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Miracles will be his son and Array his attendant.
Intelligent will be the scholar
And Intent on Freedom from Delusion the one of miracles.
$2506 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred million
Worthy ones who are free from all contaminants.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
$2507 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has gone to cessation
Will also remain for twenty-one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Seven leagues large and studded with jewels.
$2508 “The protector of the world, Kṣemaṃkara,
Will be born in a place called Fearless Splendor.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend sixty leagues.
$2509 “Stable Meaning will be his father, and Supreme Steadfastness will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Earnest his attendant.
Holder of Subtle Qualities will be the scholar
And Abiding Lamp the one of miracles.
$2510 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Worthy ones who instill faith in the world and are free from attachment.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2511 “And the sacred Dharma of the one who has gone beyond appearance
Will remain for ninety thousand years. [283.a]
When this great compassionate one has attained nirvāṇa
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2512 “The thus-gone Siṃhamati
Will be born in a place called Shining Brightness.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$2513 “Delightful will be his father, and Divine Joy will be this victor’s mother.
Teacher will be his son and Endowed with Beauty his attendant.
Worthy of Worship will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith the one of miracles.
$2514 “There will be thirty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred sixty million
Who go beyond the divine abodes.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-one thousand years,
$2515 “And the sacred Dharma will remain for ten million years.
The stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will be eleven leagues large, covered with golden canopies
And studded with ten million supreme jewels.
$2516 “The thus-gone Ratnayaśas
Will be born in a place called Golden Lamp.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirteen leagues.
$2517 “Excellent Divinity will be his father, and Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Arrival will be his son and Intelligent his attendant.
Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Abiding Free from Dullness the one of miracles.
$2518 “There will be ninety-one consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Who have attained the nonabiding path.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$2519 “And the sacred Dharma of the one free from attachment
Will also remain for ninety-nine thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And all realms will be filled with fine stūpas.
$2520 “The heart of sentient beings, Kṛtārtha,
Will be born in a place called Arranged by Gods.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend five hundred leagues.
$2521 “Abandonment will be his father, and Crest of Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Awakening will be his son and Endowed with Dharma his attendant.
Abode of Qualities will be the scholar
And Clear Liberation the one of miracles.
$2522 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering worthy ones
Numbering one trillion. [283.b]
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-one thousand years,
$2523 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The stūpa containing the relics of this victor
Will be twelve leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
$2524 “The thus-gone Kṛtāntadarśin
Will be born in a place called Beautifully Purified.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend sixty leagues.
$2525 “Purity will be his father, and Certain Accomplishment will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Excellence will be his son and Fame Gift his attendant.
Stūpa of Joy will be the scholar
And Clarity Free from Dullness the one of miracles.
$2526 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering worthy ones
Numbering one billion.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years.
$2527 “When this teacher has attained nirvāṇa,
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And fine stūpas will fill the trichiliocosm.
$2528 “The thus-gone Bhavapuṣpa
Will be born in a place called Proclamation of Fame.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-five leagues.
$2529 “Limit of Existence will be his father, and Sun of Intelligence will be this victor’s mother.
Child of the Wealth God will be his son and Moon and Sun his attendant.
Joy of the Worthy Ones will be the scholar
And Instiller of Faith in Noble Beings the one of miracles.
$2530 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred forty million
Who are equal to space in lacking an ‘I.’
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-two thousand years,
$2531 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for twenty-one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Thirteen leagues large and adorned with arrays of jewels.
$2532 “The protector of the world, Ūrṇa,
Will be born in a place called Supreme Steps.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend thirty-three leagues.
$2533 “Highest Clarity will be his father, and Accomplishment of Yogic Discipline will be this victor’s mother.
Delightful Moon will be his son and Highest Joy his attendant.
Mode of Liberation will be the scholar
And Abiding Free from Suffering the one of miracles. [284.a]
$2534 “There will be twenty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering two hundred thirty million
Who are immutable, like the king of mountains.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-two thousand years,
$2535 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will also remain for twenty-two thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And there will appear eight hundred billion stūpas.
$2536 “The buddha Atula­pratibhāna­rāja
Will be born in a place called Diverse Beauty.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend forty leagues.
$2537 “Flawless will be his father, and Seeing Qualities will be this victor’s mother.
Possessor of Qualities will be his son and Endowed with Wisdom his attendant.
Supreme Banner will be the scholar
And Crest of the Child of the Wealth God the one of miracles.
$2538 “There will be ninety consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred twenty million
Who are clear like water or the sky.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-two thousand years,
$2539 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety-one thousand years.
For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
$2540 “The buddha Vibhakta­jñā­svara
Will be born in a place called Famed Divinity.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend twenty-two leagues.
$2541 “Fine Face will be his father, and Authentic will be this victor’s mother.
Wish for Merit will be his son and Leader his attendant.
Accomplishment of Yogic Discipline will be the scholar
And Abiding Free from Attachment the one of miracles.
$2542 “There will be thirty-three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred twenty million
Immaculate ones free from the stains of the world.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-four thousand years,
$2543 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for thirty-one thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Sixty leagues large and adorned with golden canopies.
$2544 “The thus-gone Siṃhadaṃṣṭra
Will be born in a place called Supreme Fragrance.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty million leagues.
$2545 “Elephant Ruler will be his father and Melody of Liberation will be this victor’s mother. [284.b]
Excellent Youth will be his son and Eye his attendant.
Gathering of Qualities will be the scholar
And Liberated Array the one of miracles.
$2546 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred seventy million
Whose conduct is free from delusion.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-four thousand years,
$2547 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And fine stūpas will fill the realms.
$2548 “The thus-gone Laḍitagāmin
Will be born in a place called Clear Truth.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-four leagues.
$2549 “Array will be his father, and Great Splendor will be this victor’s mother.
Gentle will be his son and Excellent his attendant.
Loving Mind will be the scholar
And Earnest Awakening the one of miracles.
$2550 “There will be twenty-five consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred ninety million
Elephant-like meditators whose minds are well trained.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-four thousand years,
$2551 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Four leagues large and beautifully decorated.
$2552 “The thus-gone Puṇyapradīpa
Will be born in a place called Crest Lamp.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$2553 “Excellent Divinity will be his father, and Supreme Fame will be this victor’s mother.
Possessor of Miraculous Power will be his son and Powerful his attendant.
Famed Stūpa will be the scholar
And King of Retention the one of miracles.
$2554 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred fifty million
Whose minds are liberated from existence.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-two thousand years,
$2555 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy-six thousand years.
For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
$2556 “The heart of sentient beings, Maṅgalin,
Will be born in a place called Radiant Splendor. [285.a]
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend ten thousand leagues.
$2557 “Excellent Divinity will be his father, and Endowed with Ethical Conduct will be this victor’s mother.
Delightful will be his son and Endowed with Light his attendant.
Dharma Light will be the scholar
And Residing in Supreme Qualities the one of miracles.
$2558 “There will be ninety-three consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering nine hundred fifty million
Who have unraveled all the knots of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$2559 “And when this teacher has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for ninety thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Eight leagues large and decorated with tassels of gold and jewels.
$2560 “The victorious one Aśokarāṣṭra,
Will be born in a place called Suffering Dispelled.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety leagues.
$2561 “Trained will be his father, and Relinquishment of Flaws will be this victor’s mother.
Discarding the Wilderness will be his son and Fierce his attendant.
Eye of Qualities will be the scholar
And Famed Emanations the one of miracles.
$2562 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering one billion
Meditators whose minds are endowed with training.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-three thousand years,
$2563 “And the sacred Dharma will also remain
For eighty-three thousand years.
To benefit wandering beings, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
$2564 “The thus-gone Maticintin
Will be born in a place called Satisfying the Mind.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2565 “Miraculous God will be his father, and Two-Minded Wish will be this victor’s mother.
Eye will be his son and Gentle his attendant.
Superior Insight will be the scholar
And Supreme and Victorious Discipline the one of miracles.
$2566 “There will be eighty-one consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred twenty million
Meditators who have reached the end of karmic imprints.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-five thousand years,
$2567 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa [285.b]
Twelve leagues large and decorated with nets of fine jewels.
$2568 “The thus-gone Matimat
Will be born in a place called Clear Insight.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend three leagues.
$2569 “Excellent Dharma will be his father, and Discipline of Liberation will be this victor’s mother.
Crest Possessor will be his son and Excellent Attention his attendant.
Nectar Joy will be the scholar
And Luminous Array the one of miracles.
$2570 “There will be eighty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred twenty million
Meditators who have reached the end of the ocean of existence.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2571 “And when this teacher has gone beyond appearances
His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years.
The stūpa of this victor will measure thirteen leagues
And be decorated with nets of numerous jewels.
$2572 “The thus-gone Dharma­pradīpākṣa
Will be born in a place called Dharma Banner.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend one hundred leagues.
$2573 “Intelligent will be his father, and Supreme Moon will be this victor’s mother.
Moon Gift will be his son and Loving Kindness his attendant.
Mind of Acumen will be the scholar
And Remaining Unperturbed the one of miracles.
$2574 “There will be sixty-four consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred fifty million
Who destroy the net of pride and craving.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-six thousand years,
$2575 “And when this teacher has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-five thousand years.
The relics of this compassionate one will be abundant
And adorned with millions of jewels.
$2576 “The protector of the world, Sudarśana,
Will be born in a place called Lamp of Splendor.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend five hundred leagues.
$2577 “Undaunted will be his father, and Possessor of Steadfast Mind will be this victor’s mother.
Intelligent will be his son and Excellent Mind his attendant.
Illuminator will be the scholar
And Engaging with the Languages of the World the one of miracles.
$2578 “There will be sixty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred thirty million
Worthy ones who have cut through the roots of poison.
The lifespan of humans will be sixty-three thousand years, [286.a]
$2579 “And when this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years.
For the benefit of the world, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the three realms.
$2580 “The thus-gone Vegajaha
Will be born in a place called Clear Joy.
The family of this victor will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ten leagues.
$2581 “Excellent Gift will be his father, and Engaging in Supreme Generosity will be this victor’s mother.
Moon Possessor will be his son and Moon Gift his attendant.
Vajra Mode will be the scholar
And Clear Wealth the one of miracles.
$2582 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred forty million
Stainless worthy ones free from pretense.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2583 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years.
For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this loving victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
$2584 “The thus-gone Atibala
Will be born in a place called Hard to Tame.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend thirty leagues.
$2585 “Undaunted will be his father, and Endowed with Merit will be this victor’s mother.
Producer will be his son and Both his attendant.
Jewel Supports will be the scholar
And Golden Lamp the one of miracles.
$2586 “There will be sixty consecutive congregations,
Each of them containing a full gathering
Of nine hundred forty million.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-eight thousand years,
$2587 “And the sacred Dharma of the one gone beyond strife
Will remain for ninety-two thousand years.
His relics will reside in a single stūpa measuring one league,
Adorned with jewel parasols and decorative canopies.
$2588 “The thus-gone Prajñāpuṣpa
Will be born in a place called Clear Expertise.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend three thousand leagues.
$2589 “Free from Disagreements#154 will be his father, and Sound of Thunder will be this victor’s mother.
Meditator will be his son and Trained his attendant.
Excellent Light of Qualities will be the scholar [286.b]
And Equal to a Divine Palace the one of miracles.
$2590 “There will be fifty consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering five hundred fifty million
Worthy ones who conquer the māras.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty-five thousand years,
$2591 “And when this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for forty thousand years.
The relics of this victor will be abundant,
And fine stūpas will fill the three realms.
$2592 “The thus-gone Dṛḍhasvara
Will be born in a place called Source of Fierce Sounds.
The family of this victor will be kṣatriya,
And his light will extend nine leagues.
$2593 “Supreme Abiding will be his father, and Golden Hue will be this victor’s mother.
Path of the World will be his son and Lamp his attendant.
Supreme Qualities will be the scholar
And Kumuda Essence the one of miracles.
$2594 “There will be sixty-two consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering six hundred eighty million
Worthy ones who have uprooted karmic imprints.
The lifespan of humans will be ninety-nine thousand years,
$2595 “And when this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty thousand years.
For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
$2596 “The heart of sentient beings, Sukhita,
Will be born in a place called Compelling Splendor.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend ninety-nine leagues.
$2597 “King of Trees will be his father, and Flower Lamp will be this victor’s mother.
Campaka will be his son and Supreme his attendant.
Divine Yogic Discipline will be the scholar
And Immutable Array the one of miracles.
$2598 “There will be eighty-five consecutive congregations
Of worthy ones who have relinquished rigidity
And who all resemble the ground.
The lifespan of humans will be twenty-three thousand years,
$2599 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for eighty thousand years.
The stūpa of this victor will measure eleven leagues
And be decorated with nets of hundreds of jewels.
$2600 “The thus-gone Arthavādin
Will be born in a place called Clear Teaching.
His family will be royal [287.a]
And his light will extend two thousand leagues.
$2601 “Excellent Moon will be his father, and Radiant Clouds will be this victor’s mother.
Endowed with Lightning will be his son and Illumination his attendant.
Illuminator will be the scholar
And Delightful Radiance the one of miracles.
$2602 “There will be ten billion consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering
One billion meditators.
The lifespan of humans will be one hundred thousand years,
$2603 “And when this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for just one thousand years.
For the benefit of wandering beings, the relics of this victor
Will be abundant, filling the realms.
$2604 “The thus-gone Priyaprasanna
Will be born in a place called Supreme Enjoyment.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one hundred thousand leagues.
$2605 “Immutable will be his father, and Nectar Light will be this victor’s mother.
Nectar will be his son and Liberated his attendant.
Lion’s Roar will be the scholar
And Immutable Abiding the one of miracles.
$2606 “There will be thirty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering three hundred fifty million
Who are experts regarding the facts of all things.
The lifespan of humans will be thirty-six thousand years,
$2607 “And when this victor has attained parinirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for sixty-six thousand years.
The relics of this victor will reside in a single stūpa
Three leagues large and decorated with nets of supreme jewels.
$2608 “The thus-gone Harivaktra
Will be born in a place called Stūpa for Teaching.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend one thousand leagues.
$2609 “Excellent Splendor will be his father, and Enjoyer of Garments will be this victor’s mother.
Leader will be his son and Excellent Abiding his attendant.
Overpowering Wisdom will be the scholar
And Abiding Free from Suffering the one of miracles.
$2610 “There will be seventy consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering seven hundred eighty million
Noble ones who have perfected freedom from dullness.
The lifespan of humans will be seventy-four thousand years,
$2611 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will remain for seventy thousand years. [287.b]
For the benefit of wandering beings,
The relics of this victor will be abundant.
$2612 “The guide of humanity, Cūḍa,
Will be born in a place called Piled Jewels.
His family will be brahmin,
And his light will extend seventy leagues.
$2613 “Excellent Crest will be his father, and Light Gift will be this victor’s mother.
Excellent Divinity will be his son and Rāhu his attendant.
Acumen and Mindfulness will be the one of intelligence
And Emanated Crest the one of miracles.
$2614 “There will be eighty-six consecutive congregations,
Each of them gathering eight hundred seventy million
Who have attained the supreme abode of fearlessness.
The lifespan of humans will be eighty thousand years,
$2615 “And when this victor has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will also remain for eighty thousand years.
This victor of incomparable great compassion
Will leave abundant relics.
$2616 “The guide of humanity, Roca,
Will be born in a place called Famed Splendor.
His family will be kṣatriya,
And his light will have immeasurable reach.
$2617 “Excellent Sight will be his father, and Worthy of Looking will be this victor’s mother.
Power will be his son and Endowed with Sweetness his attendant.
Illuminator will be the one of intelligence
And Free from Attachment and Dullness the one of miracles.
$2618 “There will be innumerable extraordinary congregations,
And the lifespan of humans will be unfathomable.
This victor will carry out all the activities
Undertaken by all the other nine hundred ninety-nine buddhas.
$2619 “After this heart of sentient beings has attained nirvāṇa
His sacred Dharma will, for the benefit of the world,
Remain for innumerable millennia
And the relics of this victor will be abundant.”
