$1 1. The Bird: Two Stories 2. The Story of Majestic Body 3. The Teacher 4. A Story about Kāśyapa 5. A Story about Ānanda 6. The Story of Son of Grasping 7. The Story of Subhadra the Mendicant#151 8. The Worthy of Offerings Litany 9. Latecomers: Two Stories
The Bird: Two Stories
The First Bird Story
$2 Once, when the Blessed One was staying at Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājagṛha teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds, from Gandhamādana Mountain a certain peacock named Beautiful to See came gliding through the sky over the garden of Prince Jeta.#152 The bird overheard the Blessed One teaching the Dharma as he sat amid the company of hundreds, which inspired him to descend to the earth and alight at the feet of the Blessed One.
$3 The Blessed One taught him three lines of the Dharma: “All conditioned things are impermanent. All phenomena are selfless. Nirvāṇa is peace. Let your mind be filled with joy at the thought of me, and you may even be released from rebirth in the animal realm.” The peacock was delighted and gazed upon the Buddha’s countenance for a long time.
$4 Then, as he flew up into the sky above, he was killed by a falcon. He died filled with joy at the thought of the Blessed One, transmigrated, and took rebirth into the family of a trader there in Rājagṛha. After nine or ten months had passed the wife gave birth to a child. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$5 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, [248.b] and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$6 One day, in admiration for the Buddha, admiration for the Dharma, and admiration for the Saṅgha, he asked for his parents’ permission and went forth. Though he was just seven years old, he cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship. After he manifested arhatship he became a person of great miracles and great power. He used his miraculous powers as a means of travel and would scoop flowers and fruits onto large leaves, carry them from one place to another, and bring them as offerings to the saṅgha.
$7 When the monks saw all this they were amazed and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why this one, who went forth as a novice at just seven years of age, cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.”
$8 So that they might become disillusioned with saṃsāra, the Blessed One asked them, “Did you see the bird that descended from the sky and alighted before me some time ago?”
“Yes, Lord, we saw him.”
$9 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “as that bird departed, filled with joy at the thought of me, he was killed by a falcon, and since he died filled with joy at the thought of me, he took birth into the family of a trader in Rājagṛha. When he grew up he went forth in my very doctrine. After he had gone forth, though just seven years old, he cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.”
$10 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did this novice take that ripened into his birth as a bird? What action did he take that, after he died, he transmigrated and took rebirth as a human being, and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, [249.a] went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$11 “Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times gone by, in the city of Vārāṇasī, King Brahmadatta reigned in Kāśi, and King Videha reigned in Videha. The two did not get along with each other, and from time to time a great many people were killed.
$12 “So it was that one day the king of Videha arrayed the four divisions of his army and advanced to wage war with King Brahmadatta. King Brahmadatta of Kāśi, upon hearing that the king of Videha had arrayed the four divisions of his army and advanced to wage war, likewise arrayed the four divisions of his army and advanced on the king of Videha to wage war.
$13 “He was defeated by the king of Videha, however, and was forced to flee. Only the king was spared, and he fled into the forest. His body was tired and aching, so he dismounted from his horse, removed his helmet, pulled off his cloak, spread it out, and sat down on it.
$14 “Not far off was a peacock surrounded by peahens. The peacock and peahens enjoyed themselves and coupled, and when he saw them, he was envious. ‘This peacock indulges his desires,’ he thought, ‘and no one does him harm. Such a life is beautiful.’
$15 “Now in times when a blessed one has not arisen in the world, the solitary buddhas appear. So it was that a solitary buddha was leaning up against a tree directly in front of the king. To catch the king’s attention, the solitary buddha made a sound like he was clearing his throat. When the king heard it, he leapt up in terror, thinking, ‘Has my opponent’s army come here?’ [249.b]
$16 “Then the king saw the solitary buddha leaning on the tree. At this sight his mind became filled with joy. ‘He is content in a forest where there are no people,’ he thought. ‘Certainly this is a great soul.’
$17 “Now it was the custom of the ancient kings that when they rode into battle or hunted deer, they would pack some food in the side bags of their horses before setting out. A little such food hung in King Brahmadatta’s horse’s side bag, and he offered these provisions to the solitary buddha.
$18 “The solitary buddha then carried the king up into the sky and established him in a state of fearlessness, whereupon the king prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may I be born as a peacock. May I thereby also please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. May I achieve such great virtues. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$19 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was King Brahmadatta then is none other than this bird. Because he offered food to the solitary buddha and prayed thus, now he has pleased me and not displeased me.”
The Second Bird Story
$20 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived on Gandhamādana Mountain a certain bird named Kumuda­vicitramaha who was sick and sure to die soon.
$21 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, [250.a] focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$22 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$23 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$24 The Blessed One thought, “The time has come to teach this bird. He will be instrumental in guiding a great many disciples.” With this thought, the Blessed One disappeared from Śrāvastī and arrived on Gandhamādana Mountain not far from where the bird was.
$25 The Blessed One performed a miracle that caused five hundred Indian roller birds to come and circumambulate the Blessed One. When the bird saw the five hundred Indian roller birds performing circumambulation, he wished that he could do the same and thought, “I will also circumambulate the Blessed One.” [250.b] He died with joy in his mind at the thought of the Blessed One and took rebirth as a god. Having taken birth as a god, he approached the Blessed One, the Blessed One taught the Dharma to him, and he saw the truths. After he saw the truths, he went back to where he belongs.
$26 Then the Blessed One spoke about the bird’s carcass to Venerable Śāriputra among the assembly of monks. “Śāriputra,” he said, “what action did this bird take that ripened into its birth as a bird?”
$27 As soon as he heard this, Venerable Śāriputra began to reflect, and though he went deep into equipoise and reached the far limits of concentration, he could not see an end to the bird’s sufferings as he died from one life as a bird and transmigrated, only to take birth as a bird again.
$28 Venerable Śāriputra rose from his meditation, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and responded to the Blessed One, “Lord, I have not been able to apprehend the bird’s origins. I saw him dying from one life as a bird and transmigrating, only to take birth as a bird again. Lord, your wisdom and vision are unimpeded—your wisdom and vision are infinite. Lord, Blessed One, I implore you, please explain the action this bird took that ripened into his taking birth only as a bird.”
$29 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that this bird committed and accumulated:
“Monks, in times gone by, when the one who transcended the levels of the listeners and solitary buddhas, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Arthadarśin was in the world, this bird went forth in his doctrine [251.a] and served as steward.
$30 “In this capacity he would solicit food and drink from patrons and donors. As he was appealing to a householder, a group of monks prevented him. He became irate and shouted, ‘You’re like animals—you don’t even think! You don’t act the way that monks should act!’
$31 “In time he came to regret this, confessed his mistake, and then practiced pure conduct all his life. At the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I not meet with the results of the wrongful act of speaking harshly to such pure beings. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this.’
$32 “O monks, what do you think? The one who served as steward then is none other than this bird. The act of speaking harshly to the monks ripened into his birth as an animal. Monks, from the time of the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Arthadarśin until my own, he has died, transmigrated, and taken rebirth only as an animal. Now he has died with joy in his mind at the thought of me, transmigrated, and taken rebirth as a god. After being reborn as a god, he came before me and I taught him the Dharma. He heard the Dharma from me, saw the truths, and then went back to where he belongs.
$33 “At that time he served as steward in accord with the Dharma, and at the time of his death he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this.’
“So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Arthadarśin—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, [251.b] gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Story of Majestic Body
$34 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain brahmin of high lineage called Majestic Body. He was prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. As they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with glowing, golden skin and a well-rounded head, long arms, a broad brow, a fine and prominent nose, and eyebrows that met. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him according to their clan, saying, “Since this is the brahmin Majestic Body’s child, his name will be More Majestic.”
$35 They reared young More Majestic on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. As he grew up he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. [252.a] Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences and he could defeat anyone in debate.
$36 One day the brahmin Majestic Body had the thought, “I shall perform a sacrifice.” Then another idea occurred to him: “The ascetic Gautama is omniscient and all-seeing, and that being the case, there is nothing he does not know—there is nothing in the past, present, or future that he does not see, know, or directly perceive. Since it wouldn’t be right for any part of my sacrifice to be lacking , I shall ask the ascetic Gautama about it first.”
$37 At that he mounted a chariot drawn by a white mare. Bearing a golden staff and a golden water pitcher, and surrounded by a company of young brahmins, he left Śrāvastī and traveled to the garden of Prince Jeta. He went as far as he could by chariot, then descended and continued to the garden on foot. He proceeded to where the Blessed One was and when he arrived he made all manner of entertaining and jovial conversation with the Blessed One. When they were finished, he took a seat at one side.
$38 Once he had taken a seat at one side, the brahmin Majestic Body asked the Blessed One, “Gautama, I have started a great sacrifice, and to perform that great sacrifice I have tied five hundred of the finest bulls to a post, as well as cattle, male and female buffalo, riding horses, calves, young calves, goats, sheep, and even insects. For the sacrifice I have also arrayed a great deal of food and drink and invited ascetics from the neighboring kingdoms, and brahmins from foreign lands, other regions, and other valleys. So that my sacrifice [252.b] is effective, I have come to Śrāvastī, and I ask the Blessed One to please explain whether any part of my sacrifice may be lacking.”
$39 The Blessed One taught him the Dharma that accorded with him, taking only his sacrifice as the point of departure. As a result the brahmin Majestic Body and his son More Majestic both destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$40 Then More Majestic said, “After this, of what use are ceremonies to us brahmins?”
“More Majestic, don’t say such things,” the brahmin Majestic Body replied. “Now we’ll offer food to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks, and after we’ve made those offerings we can give the leftovers to the brahmins.”
“As you wish, preceptor,” More Majestic said.
$41 The brahmin Majestic Body rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Blessed One, please permit me to invite you, together with the saṅgha of monks, to take tomorrow’s meal at the sacrificial site.” The Blessed One assented to the brahmin Majestic Body by his silence.
$42 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the brahmin Majestic Body then touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and took leave of him. When he arrived at the site of the sacrifice he released his entire fine herd—cattle, male and female buffalo, riding horses, calves, young calves, goats, sheep, and all the different insects as well—saying, “As you travel to the four directions whence the cool air appears, from this day forth may you all eat of the finest, unwilted plants, [253.a] and drink from placid, tranquil, clear waters.” He released all the different insects as well.#153
$43 After preparing many good, wholesome foods that night, he rose the next morning, prepared seats, filled the water pots, and set them out. Then he sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him it was time for the midday meal: “Lord, the midday meal is upon us. Know that the time has come, Blessed One, and your presence is requested.”
$44 In the morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and holy robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he set out for the brahmin Majestic Body’s reception room, surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks. Once the brahmin Majestic Body and the brahmin child More Majestic knew that the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks were comfortably seated, by their own hands they contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. Having by their own hands contented them with many different kinds of good, wholesome food, proffering all that they wished, they offered each of them a set of clothes. Once they knew that the Blessed One had finished eating and that his bowl had been taken away and his hands washed, they sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma. After the Blessed One had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted them with a Dharma teaching he rose from his seat and departed.
$45 After the Blessed One had departed, all the brahmins at the site of the sacrifice were irate. They said, “Look—everything that was prepared for the sacrifice has been given to the ascetic Gautama.”
When the brahmin Majestic Body [253.b] heard they were angry, he immediately approached the brahmins and said, “What harm has the ascetic Gautama done to you? I shall repay you for the offerings you set out.”
$46 “We no longer need your offerings,” said the brahmins, for they were going to kill both father and child.
“They’re coming to kill us,” the father and child thought, so they both fled. They traveled to the garden of Prince Jeta, where they went to see the Blessed One. When they arrived they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and told him the story in detail. Then they requested, “Lord, let us give up living at home. Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$47 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Having cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
“Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why the brahmins were going to put the brahmin Majestic Body and the brahmin child More Majestic to death, which was enough for them to become disillusioned with saṃsāra so that they went forth, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$48 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, the brahmins were going to put them to death, and that was enough for them to become disillusioned with saṃsāra so that they went forth and practiced the holy life. Listen well!
$49 “Monks, [254.a] in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there was as a certain brahmin who was preparing a sacrifice. Another brahmin began to quarrel with him, became irate, and stabbed the brahmin with a weapon until that brahmin died from his stab wounds. This angered all the other brahmins, who said, ‘Never again will we make use of your gifts.’ No longer considering him a brahmin, they went on to curse him and prepared to kill him.
$50 “He and his son fled in fear of the other brahmins. They traveled to Ṛṣivadana and went forth in the presence of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Thereupon they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and though they did not achieve any great virtues, at the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘While we may not have attained any great virtues, still we have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all our lives. Therefore, may we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$51 “O monks, what do you think? The brahmins who were father and son then, and went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, are none other than the brahmins Majestic Body and More Majestic. At that time the brahmins were going to put them both to death, [254.b] and then, terrified of dying, they went forth and practiced pure conduct all their lives. Now as well, the brahmins were going to kill them both, and, terrified of dying, they have gone forth, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$52 “At that time they went forth, practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$53 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Teacher
$54 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, a certain householder lived there. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. As time went on, the householder’s second son was born, and then a third, and so on up to seven. At the elaborate feasts celebrating their births, they named them according to their clan.
$55 They reared them on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and when they were [255.a] grown they studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. They became skilled at writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, masters of the eight types of examination.
One day the father told them, “Heed what I say—entrust yourselves to the householder Anāthapiṇḍada, for he will benefit you in this life and the next.”
$56 Six of his sons replied, “What is the use of entrusting ourselves to the householder Anāthapiṇḍada?” and they did not heed his word. One son began to favor Pūraṇa Kāśyapa , the second liked Maskarin Gośālīputra, the third liked Saṃjayin Vairaṭīputra, the fourth liked Ajita Keśakambala, the fifth liked Kakuda Kātyāyana, and the sixth liked Nirgrantha Jñātiputra.#154 The seventh did heed his father’s word, however, and entrusted himself to the householder Anāthapiṇḍada. Having entrusted himself to him, he delighted in the doctrine of the Blessed One, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts.
$57 Later the householder’s eldest son invited Pūraṇa Kāśyapa and gave him food, the second invited Maskarin Gośālīputra and gave him food, the third invited Saṃjayin Vairaṭīputra and gave him food, the fourth invited Ajita Keśakambala and gave him food, the fifth invited Kakuda Kātyāyana and gave him food, and the sixth invited Nirgrantha Jñātiputra and gave him food. At this the seventh said to his elder brothers, [255.b] “Each of you has given food to his own teacher. I shall likewise offer provisions to the Blessed One. You all should help me.”
$58 The young man extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks, and that night he prepared many good, wholesome foods. In the morning the young man rose, prepared seats, filled the water pots, and set them out. Then he sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him it was time for the midday meal: “Lord, the midday meal is upon us. Know that the time has come, Blessed One, and your presence is requested.”
$59 In the morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he set out surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks, until they arrived at the householder’s reception room. He took his place on the seat prepared for him there amid the saṅgha of monks.
$60 When the householder, his sons, and his servants knew that the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks were comfortably seated, by their own hands they contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. Having by their own hands contented the Buddha and the saṅgha of monks with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished, once the householder, his sons, and his servants knew that they had finished eating, that their bowls had been taken away and their hands washed, they brought in very low seats and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$61 Then the Blessed One, directly apprehending the thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature of the householder, his sons, and his servants, taught them the Dharma accordingly. Upon hearing it, they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$62 After seeing the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder [256.a] of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and said to the Blessed One, “Because of you, Blessed One, we have been lifted up from among the hell beings, animals, and anguished spirits. Leading us to live among the gods and humans, you have dried up the ocean of blood and tears, led us over the mountain pass of bones, slammed shut the doors to lower births, and swung wide open the doors to the god realms and liberation. You have brought to an end the afflictive emotions to which we have been accustomed since beginningless time, pacifying them, tossing them aside, and casting them away. Blessed One, for as long as we live, may you and the rest of the saṅgha of monks please accept from us your provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick.” The Blessed One replied, “Householder, please relent—there are others who also need my help,” and departed.
$63 After the Blessed One had departed, the householder’s sons thought, “We will give up living at home to go forth.” They asked for their parents’ permission and went to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and made this request of the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$64 With the words “Come, join me, monks! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, [256.b] their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands were like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. Their state was such that Indra, Upendra, and the other gods worshiped and venerated them and addressed them with respect.
$65 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why six of the householder’s seven children had divergent views and could not agree with each other until the youngest brother brought them around to a single view and they all went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$66 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, the other six brothers could not come to an agreement until the youngest brother alone brought them into agreement and all of them went forth in the presence of a sage and generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Listen well!
$67 “Monks, in times gone by, the seven kings of the central country each reigned in their own lands. None of them was friendly with the others, and from time to time a great many people were killed. One day King Brahmadatta of Kāśi thought, ‘How can I restore relations among the kings of these neighboring lands?’
$68 “At that time in the land of Brahmadatta, king of Kāśi, there was a sage living in a certain hermitage who had all five superknowledges, a person of great miracles and great power. King Brahmadatta thought, ‘If I call upon that sage, he can restore relations between them.’ [257.a] He went to see the sage, bowed down at his feet, and said, ‘The six neighboring kings are not friendly with one another, and from time to time a great many people are killed. It would be right of you to restore relations between them.’ The sage assented to King Brahmadatta by his silence. Understanding that by his silence the sage had given his assent, King Brahmadatta bowed down at his feet and departed.
$69 “One day the six kings arrayed all four divisions of their armies and advanced on Vārāṇasī. With the four divisions of their armies all arrayed, they completely surrounded the city in siege, whereupon Brahmadatta, king of Kāśi, sent word to the sage. As soon as he heard, the sage traveled through the sky from his dwelling to the very place where the six kings were encamped.
$70 “Upon seeing the sage, all six kṣatriya kings were immediately overcome with joy toward him. In their joy they went to see the sage, and upon their arrival they bowed down at his feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. After he taught them the Dharma, the sage got them all to form a truce. After having made a truce, they resolved to go forth in the presence of the sage. Each informed the other of his intention#155 and traveled back to his own land. After each had abdicated in favor of his son, given gifts, and made merit, they all went forth in the presence of that sage. Having gone forth, they generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$71 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The six kings who disagreed with each other then are none other than the six brothers who could not come to an agreement now. [257.b] The one who was King Brahmadatta then is none other than the youngest son himself. At that time the sage brought them into agreement and they went forth before him, generating the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Six of the brothers had divergent views, were brought around to a single view, went forth, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$72 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did the householder, his sons, and their servants take that ripened into their births into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that they pleased and did not displease the Blessed One; and that they went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$73 “When did they make these prayers?” they asked.
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there was a householder in Vārāṇasī with six older sons who had divergent views and could not come to an agreement.
$74 “The youngest of the sons delighted in the Buddha. He led his six older brothers to the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. All of them asked for their parents’ permission, went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, and practiced pure conduct all their lives. [258.a] At the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$75 “The householder also gave gifts and made merit, went for refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life. At the time of his death, he prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. At that time may these same seven children be my children. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$76 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that householder then is none other than this householder. The acts of giving gifts and making merit, taking refuge and maintaining the fundamental precepts, and praying at the time of his death ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that he has pleased me and not displeased me; and that they alone were his sons. The sons also practiced the conduct that leads to enlightenment all their lives, and prayed at the time of their deaths.
$77 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, [258.b] cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
A Story about Kāśyapa
$78 Once, when the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa had spent a long time in a retreat hermitage. After the hair on his head and face had grown long and his clothes were worn out, he went to see the Blessed One. At that time the Blessed One sat amid a company of hundreds teaching the Dharma to the saṅgha of monks. The monks saw Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa from a distance and felt contempt for him. They thought, “An person who has gone forth—a monk—with long hair on his head and face, and so carelessly dressed, in such shoddy clothing! Where does he come from?”
$79 The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts and reflected, “After my parinirvāṇa, the monk Kāśyapa will fulfill the purpose of my teaching. He will recount the Sūtras, Abhidharma, and Vinaya, yet these monks feel such contempt for him. I must settle this objection for them, for he will become a worthy object of worship and reverence, and be spoken of with respect by all the world with its gods and humans.”
$80 The Blessed One addressed the monks, saying, “Monks, you should not feel such contempt for this monk. After my parinirvāṇa he will recount my teaching. He will perfectly recount the Tripiṭaka and propagate the way of the Dharma.”
$81 Then the Blessed One addressed Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa, “ Kāśyapa , come along! Welcome, Kāśyapa ! Share this seat with me. Let us examine which of us first went forth—you or me?” [259.a]
$82 All the monks felt horrible regret and their hair stood on end. “Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa has such great miraculous powers,” they said. “How wonderful that our teacher is sharing a seat with his disciple.”
$83 Then Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, knelt down on his right knee, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and said, “Blessed One, you are my teacher. I am a disciple of the Blessed One. The Sugata is my teacher. I am a disciple of the Sugata.”
$84 “ Kāśyapa , so it is,” the Blessed One replied. “It is just as you say, Kāśyapa . I am your teacher, Kāśyapa . You are my disciple. Kāśyapa , wherever my seat may be, you shall sit upon it.” Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$85 The Blessed One wished to make the monks greatly disillusioned with saṃsāra and to affirm Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa’s greatness in the Dharma, so he said to the monks, “Monks, should I wish to remain in the perfected state of the first concentration, which is secluded from craving, secluded from sinful and nonvirtuous factors, accompanied by initial consideration and subsequent analysis, and imbued with the joy and pleasure born of seclusion, I could remain in that state throughout the day, or throughout the night, or throughout a day and night, or for even two, three, or seven such days and nights.
$86 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to remain in the perfected state of the first concentration, which is secluded from craving, secluded from sinful and nonvirtuous factors, accompanied by initial consideration and subsequent analysis, and imbued with the joy and pleasure born of seclusion, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state [259.b] for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$87 “Monks, should I wish to be free of initial consideration and subsequent analysis, inwardly serene, with single-pointed focus, and thereby abide in the perfected state of the second concentration, which is without initial consideration and subsequent analysis, and imbued with the joy and pleasure born of meditative stabilization , I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$88 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to be free of initial consideration and subsequent analysis, inwardly serene, with single-pointed focus, and thereby abide in the perfected state of the second concentration, which is without initial consideration and subsequent analysis, and imbued with the joy and pleasure born of meditative stabilization , the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$89 “Monks, should I wish to be free from attachment to joy, and thereby settle in impartiality, with mindfulness, introspection, and physical pleasure, and become, as the noble ones say, ‘impartial, mindful, and at ease,’ to abide in the perfected state of the third concentration devoid of joy, I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$90 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to be free from attachment to joy, and thereby settle in impartiality, with mindfulness, introspection, and physical pleasure, and become, as the noble ones say, ‘impartial, mindful, and at ease,’ to abide in the perfected state of the third concentration devoid of joy, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain [260.a] in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$91 “Monks, should I wish to relinquish pleasure and, having already given up pain, and with happiness and unhappiness also already gone, abide in the perfected state of the fourth concentration, with neither pleasure nor pain, and with pure impartiality and mindfulness, I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$92 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to relinquish pleasure and, having already given up pain, and with happiness and unhappiness also already gone, abide in the perfected state of the fourth concentration, with neither pleasure nor pain, and with pure impartiality and mindfulness, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$93 “Monks, should I wish to abide with a loving mind,#156 which is free of hostility, enmity, and ill will, and which is lofty, expansive, nonjudgmental, immeasurable, and well developed, focused on one cardinal direction, pervading it to its very end, and then extend this loving mind, which is free of hostility, enmity, and ill will, and which is lofty, expansive, nonjudgmental, immeasurable, and well developed, to pervade to their very end the second cardinal direction, the third, the fourth, above, below, and straight ahead, encompassing the worlds in their entirety, monks, I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days. [260.b]
$94 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to abide with a loving mind, which is free of hostility, enmity, and ill will, and which is lofty, expansive, nonjudgmental, immeasurable, and well developed, focused on one cardinal direction, pervading it to its very end, and then extend this loving mind, which is free of hostility, enmity, and ill will, and which is lofty, expansive, nonjudgmental, immeasurable, and well developed, to pervade to their very end the second cardinal direction, the third, the fourth, above, below, and straight ahead, encompassing the worlds in their entirety, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$95 “The mind suffused with compassion, joy, and equanimity can be elaborated in kind.
“Monks, should I wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of boundless space,#157 in which I have transcended the perceptions of form in all respects, such that my perception of physical barriers has vanished, and, no longer bringing to mind the perceptions of diversity, I recognize this to be the sphere of boundless space, I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$96 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of boundless space, in which he has transcended the perceptions of form in all respects, such that his perception of material barriers has vanished, and, no longer bringing to mind the perceptions of diversity, he recognizes this to be the sphere of boundless space, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, [261.a] or even two, three, or seven such days.
$97 “Monks, should I wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of boundless consciousness, in which I have transcended the sphere of boundless space and recognize this to be the sphere of boundless consciousness, I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$98 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of boundless consciousness, in which he has transcended the sphere of boundless space in all respect and recognizes this to be the sphere of boundless consciousness, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$99 “Monks, should I wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of nothing whatsoever, in which I have transcended the sphere of boundless consciousness in all respects and recognize this to be nothing whatsoever, I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$100 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of nothing whatsoever, in which he has transcended the sphere of boundless consciousness in all respects and recognizes this to be nothing whatsoever, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$101 “Monks, should I wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception, in which I have transcended the sphere of nothing whatsoever in all respects, I could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, or even two, three, or seven such days.
$102 “Monks, should the monk Kāśyapa wish to abide in the perfected state of the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception, in which he has transcended the sphere of nothing whatsoever in all respects, the monk Kāśyapa too could remain in that state for a day, or a night, or a day and night, [261.b] or even two, three, or seven such days.
$103 “Monks, when I wish to do so, I can employ a vast array of miracles. With clear understanding and knowledge of how to materialize and dematerialize I become one and then become many, and having become many, I then become one. I pass directly through walls. I pass directly through enclosed spaces. Bodily I pass directly through mountains, unobstructed, just as if they were empty space. I dive into the earth like a seagull into water. I walk on water without sinking into it, just as if it were the surface of the earth. I sit cross-legged in the sky like a bird. I hold and caress radiant beams like those of the sun and moon, those in miraculous displays, and those of feats of magic. I can physically control the worlds all the way up to Brahmāloka.
$104 “Monks, when the monk Kāśyapa wishes to do so, he too can employ a vast array of miracles. With clear understanding and knowledge of how to materialize and dematerialize the monk Kāśyapa likewise becomes one and then becomes many, and having become many, he then becomes one. He passes directly through walls. He passes directly through enclosed spaces. Bodily he passes directly through mountains, unobstructed, just as if they were empty space. He dives into the earth like a seagull into water. He walks on water without sinking into it, just as if it were the surface of the earth. He sits cross-legged in the sky like a bird. He holds and caresses radiant beams like those of the sun and moon, those in miraculous displays, and those of feats of magic. He can physically control the worlds all the way up to Brahmāloka.
$105 “Monks, with [262.a] perfectly clear divine hearing, beyond that of normal humans, I hear the sounds of both humans and nonhumans, be they near or far.
“Monks, with perfectly clear divine hearing, beyond that of normal humans, the monk Kāśyapa too hears the sounds of both humans and nonhumans, be they near or far.
$106 “Monks, I know the minds of other beings and other persons, with their initial consideration and subsequent analysis, exactly as they are. Lustful#158 minds and minds free of lust I know in full, exactly as they are. Hateful minds and minds free of hatred; ignorant minds and minds free of ignorance; minds closed or radiant, dull or disciplined, wild or tame, lofty, tranquil, or turbulent, resting in equanimity or not resting so, cultivated or uncultivated; and those liberated, those not, those completely and utterly liberated, and those not—all these I know in full, exactly as they are.
$107 “Monks, the monk Kāśyapa also knows exactly the minds of other beings and other persons, with their initial consideration and subsequent analysis exactly as they are. Lustful minds and minds free of lust he knows in full, exactly as they are. Hateful minds and minds free of hatred; ignorant minds and minds free of ignorance; minds closed or radiant, dull or disciplined, wild or tame, lofty, tranquil, or turbulent, [262.b] resting in equanimity or not resting so, cultivated or uncultivated; and those completely liberated, those not, those completely and utterly liberated, and those not—all these he knows in full, exactly as they are.
$108 “Monks, I can recall many of my previous lives. I remember one life, or two, or three—four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty—or a hundred lives, a thousand lives, a hundred thousand lives, hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of lives, hundreds upon hundreds of millions of lives, an eon of dissolution, an eon of the formation of the universe, an eon of dissolution and formation , many eons of dissolution, many eons of formation , or many eons of dissolution and formation.
$109 “I can remember my identity as all those beings: that I was born in such-and-such a place into this family and that clan, what kinds of food I ate, the happiness and suffering I experienced during my life, how long I was in each state of rebirth, the potential duration of each life, how long each life in fact lasted, that after I died I transmigrated and took rebirth in such-and-such a place, and that when I died from there and transmigrated, what type of rebirth I took. I can recall the many aspects of my previous states, including each aspect, their locations, and the reasons behind them.
$110 “Monks, the monk Kāśyapa can also recall many of his previous lives. He remembers one life, or two, or three—four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or [263.a] fifty—or a hundred lives, a thousand lives, a hundred thousand lives, hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of lives, hundreds upon hundreds of millions of lives, an eon of dissolution, an eon of the formation of the universe, an eon of dissolution and formation , many eons of dissolution, many eons of formation , or many eons of dissolution and formation.
$111 “He can remember his identity as all those beings: that he was born in such-and-such a place into this family and that clan, what kinds of food he ate, the happiness and suffering he experienced during his life, how long he was in each state of rebirth, the potential duration of each life, how long each life in fact lasted, that after he died he transmigrated and took rebirth in such-and-such a place, and that when he died from there and transmigrated, what type of rebirth he took. He can recall the many aspects of his previous states, including each aspect, their locations, and the reasons behind them.
$112 “Monks, with perfectly clear divine vision, beyond that of normal humans, I see how beings continue to die, transmigrate, and take birth; whether they will be of good appearance, bad appearance, or good and bad appearance; and if they will take happy births or fall to lower realms. Fully aware of their actions, I am fully aware of their destinations.
$113 “I see that when they separate from their bodies at death—by cause and condition of adopting the wrong teachings and actions—those who comport themselves wrongly, those who speak wrongly, those who reflect wrongly, those who hurl insults at the noble ones, and those who hold wrong views will fall to lower realms and take rebirth as hell beings. And I see that when they separate from their bodies at death—by cause and condition of adopting the right teachings and actions—those who comport themselves rightly, those who speak [263.b] rightly, those who reflect rightly, those who refrain from hurling insults at the noble ones, and those who hold right views will travel to happy migrations and take rebirth among gods in the heavens.
$114 “Monks, with perfectly clear divine vision, beyond that of normal humans, the monk Kāśyapa also sees how beings continue to die, transmigrate, and to take birth; whether they will be of good appearance, bad appearance, or good and bad appearance; and if they will take happy births or fall to lower realms. Fully aware of their actions, he is fully aware of their destinations.
$115 “He sees that when they separate from their bodies at death—by cause and condition of adopting the wrong teachings and actions—those who comport themselves wrongly, those who speak wrongly, those who reflect wrongly, those who hurl insults at the noble ones, and those who hold wrong views will fall to lower realms and take rebirth as hell beings. And he sees that when they separate from their bodies at death—by cause and condition of adopting the right teachings and actions—those who comport themselves rightly, those who speak rightly, those who reflect rightly, those who refrain from hurling insults at the noble ones, and those who hold right views will travel to happy migrations and take rebirth among gods in the heavens.
$116 “Monks, in this very life I have exhausted the outflows. My mind, thus free of outflows, has been liberated, wisdom has been liberated, and having directly realized and accomplished this through my own superknowledge, rebirth is extinguished for me. [264.a] I have lived the holy life, I have done what was before me, and I understand that I shall know no other existence.
$117 “Monks, in this very life the monk Kāśyapa has also exhausted the outflows. His mind, thus free of outflows, has been liberated, wisdom has been liberated, and having directly realized this though his own superknowledge, rebirth is extinguished for him. He has lived the holy life, he has done what was before him, and he understands that he will know no other existence.”
$118 As the Blessed One, there amid hundreds of disciples, affirmed Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa’s greatness as being like his own, he made him supreme guru of the entire world with its gods.
$119 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the Blessed One affirmed the vast greatness of Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa as being like his own, making him guru of all the entire world with its gods.”
$120 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, when I venerated him, he became the guru of all of the many people living in this realm. Listen well!
$121 “Monks, in times past, during King Brahmadatta’s reign in the city of Vārāṇasī, the kingdom was prosperous, flourishing, happy, and well populated. The harvest was good. Quarreling and arguments had ceased, there was no fighting or infighting, and there were no robbers, thieves, illness, or famine. Rice, sugarcane, cattle, and buffalo were plentiful. King Brahmadatta did no harm, and he ruled the kingdom gently and mercifully, as a parent cares for a beloved only child.
$122 “The king had as many as five hundred queens. Though they all enjoyed themselves and [264.b] coupled, they had no children. Wishing for an heir he supplicated every possible deity, but despite his earnest supplications neither son nor daughter was born.
$123 “The king had five hundred ministers, every one of them arrogant and imprudent. But his chief minister, whose name was Treasure , was capable, clear-minded, shrewd, disciplined, and prudent.
$124 “King Brahmadatta had a disagreement with a certain neighboring king, so he thought, ‘Which minister can I send to that neighboring country who will be able to form a truce with its king and safeguard my country?’
$125 “When the king pondered this, he saw that his chief minister Treasure was capable, clear-minded, shrewd, disciplined, and prudent. ‘He can form a truce with that king and safeguard my country,’ the king thought. The king appointed him to a post among the surrounding mountains and told him: ‘Go, stay there, and safeguard the country.’
$126 “ ‘As you wish, Deva,’ he replied. He went out among the mountains, and there he stayed. After he got there and had assumed control of the neighboring territory, no harm befell the country at all.
$127 “One day, after King Brahmadatta had grown old, one of his wives conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$128 “They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. Once he was able to walk, the king thought, ‘I’m old now, and it will not be long before I die. After I pass away, this child [265.a] will not be able to rule the kingdom. Who among my ministers can safeguard my child and my kingdom, then?’ He pondered and recognized that every one of his five hundred ministers was arrogant and imprudent, and he wondered, ‘Who else is there?’
$129 “Upon examination he realized, ‘My chief minister Treasure is capable, clear-minded, shrewd, disciplined, and prudent. After I pass away he will be able to safeguard my child and my kingdom.’ And he thought, ‘If I offer him my respect, all the many inhabitants of my country will respect him in the same way.’ So he sent a messenger to him, saying, ‘I wish to meet with you. Come quickly.’
$130 “As soon as he heard this, chief minister Treasure hurried to Vārāṇasī, where the king had the streets and houses beautified to show his respect. The king arrayed the four divisions of his army and received chief minister Treasure in person. When he greeted Treasure , King Brahmadatta descended from his elephant, and, beside himself with joy, put his arms around him. They rode a single mount, traveling to the city of Vārāṇasī in great opulence.
$131 “After he bade him sit together with him on a single seat, their food was prepared together and they ate from a single plate. Then the king gave him a great mountain of wealth and said to him, ‘O Treasure , I am old now, and it will not be long before I die. After my death, the five hundred ministers will all think, “This child is king?” and they will come to revile him. After my death you will be able to safeguard my son and my kingdom. Therefore, I entrust my son and kingdom to you. Safeguard them after my death!’ [265.b]
“ ‘As you wish, Deva,’ replied the chief minister Treasure.
$132 “One day King Brahmadatta fell ill. Though he was treated with medicinal roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and fruits, he could not be cured so he ceded the throne to the prince, entrusted both to the chief minister Treasure , and proclaimed that after his death, it was he who would safeguard his son and his kingdom.
$133 “After the elder king died, the chief minister Treasure dispatched his retinue, summoned the five hundred ministers, and told them, ‘I say to all of you, it may be that the elder king has died,#159 but you should not think there is no one to unify us. I shall grant each of you a portion of the country. We must make certain that this young king is not harmed by anyone.’
$134 “He granted a portion of the country to each of the five hundred ministers, and safeguarded both the prince and his family. When the prince had grown, the chief minister Treasure told him, ‘Deva, your father, the king, entrusted you, Deva, and the kingdom to me. After your father’s passing I safeguarded you, Deva, and the kingdom.’
$135 “O monks, what do you think? It is none other than Kāśyapa who was the chief minister Treasure then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. At that time when I offered him my respect, he became the guru of all the many people who lived in this country. Now as well I have offered him my respect, and when I affirmed his vast greatness as being like my own, he became guru of all the world.”
A Story about Ānanda
$136 After Venerable Ānanda had gone forth, he learned all 84,000 divisions of the Dharma, and the Blessed One [266.a] commended him as foremost among keepers and compilers of the teachings. The Blessed One also commended Mahā­kāśyapa’s vast greatness as being like his own. Thereupon they both became gurus of the entire world with its gods.
$137 The Blessed One thought, “After my parinirvāṇa, these two monks will be able to fulfill the purpose of my teachings. One will be able to safeguard the treasury of teachings, and the other will be able to recount my doctrine.” Having reflected thus, the Blessed One traveled to the city of Kuśinagarī.
$138 When the Blessed One was passing into parinirvāṇa he thought, “If I pass my doctrine on to only human beings and don’t pass it on to any nonhuman beings, it will not remain for long; and if I pass it on to only nonhuman beings, and do not pass it on to any human beings, then it also will not remain for long. So I will pass on my doctrine to gods and humans, and to both these monks as well, for then its keepers will be gods and human beings alike. Then, kept by gods, humans, and both these monks as well, the doctrine will remain for a long time.”
$139 Having reflected thus, the Blessed One said to Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa, “ Kāśyapa , after I pass into parinirvāṇa, you must not pass into parinirvāṇa until you have carried on my doctrine and perfectly recounted the Tripiṭaka, and the monk Ānanda has cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.”
$140 Then the Blessed One spoke to Venerable Ānanda, saying, “Ānanda, do not pass into parinirvāṇa until the sage Mādhyandina has gone forth. Then you must tell him, ‘You must not pass into parinirvāṇa until you have tamed the nāga king Hulluru, [266.b] founded the kingdom of Kashmir, and established the doctrine there. As it flourishes there the householder Śāṇavāsa will go forth. You must not pass into parinirvāṇa until he has cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship, and you have passed on to him all that you have heard.’
$141 “Then Mādhyandina must tell Śāṇavāsa, ‘You must not pass into parinirvāṇa until you have tamed the two nāga kings Naṭa and Vīra, and they have established the hermitages of Naṭa and Vīra. There shall be a perfume merchant named Gupta in Mathurā, and he will have a son named Upagupta. You must not pass into parinirvāṇa until he goes forth, casts away all afflictive emotions, manifests arhatship, and you have passed on to him all that you have heard.’
$142 “Then Śāṇavāsa must tell Upagupta, ‘You must not pass into parinirvāṇa until noble Dhītika has gone forth, manifested arhatship, and you have passed on to him all that you have heard.’
“Upagupta must tell Dhītika, ‘You must not pass into parinirvāṇa until you decide to consume poisoned food in Pāṭaliputra.’ ”#160
Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa and Ānanda rose, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and said, “As you wish, Blessed One.”
$143 The Blessed One spoke to Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa, saying, “ Kāśyapa , go now and lead the saṅgha of ordinary beings to wander the country. Let there be no disagreement among you prior to my parinirvāṇa.” [267.a]
“As you wish, Lord,” he replied, and Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa went and led the saṅgha of ordinary beings to wander the country.
$144 Not long after Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa had left, the Blessed One had a thought about the world: “It would be good if Śakra, King of the Gods, and the four great kings—Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūpākṣa, Virūḍhaka, and Vaiśravaṇa—would come to see me.” So the Blessed One performed a miracle that caused Śakra, King of the Gods, and the four great kings to disappear from among the gods and appear instantly seated before the Blessed One. They scattered divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers over the Blessed One, and again sat down before him.
$145 “Lords,” the Blessed One said to Śakra, King of the Gods, and the four great kings, “before long the Tathāgata will pass into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. After my parinirvāṇa, may you safeguard my doctrine.
$146 “Lords, in a thousand years, when the doctrine has begun to decline, when injustice prevails in the world and the path of the ten virtuous actions has lost all its strength, Jambudvīpa will be filled with an ill wind. With the arrival of this ill wind, rain will cease to fall. When the rain ceases to fall, all the rivers and wells will have but little water in them. The trees will neither flower nor bear fruit, the harvests and fruits will lack any vitality, and they will also be devastated by hail. The grain too will be ruined, and there will be famine. When the famine occurs, human beings [267.b] will be forced to eat wild millet. They will have little strength and their life force will diminish.
$147 “Śakas, Yavanas, Bāhlikas, kings, and brigands will harm the living. After the Śakas, Yavanas, Bāhlikas, kings, and brigands have done their harm, they will also seize the Tathāgata’s crown protrusion, eye teeth, alms bowl, stūpas, and such, and take them east. After that a king of the barbaric outlying regions named Śaka will come from the south with a suite of a hundred thousand attendants, raze the monasteries of the saṅgha, tear down the stūpas, and slay the monks.
$148 “A king of the barbaric outlying regions named Bāhlika will come from the west with a suite of a hundred thousand attendants, raze the monasteries of the saṅgha, tear down the stūpas, and slay the monks.
$149 “A king of the barbaric outlying regions named Yavana will come from the north with a suite of a hundred thousand attendants, raze the monasteries of the saṅgha, tear down the stūpas, and slay the monks. Because of all this, the people and the robbers will blame and harm one another, and the monks will wish to travel east.
$150 “Lords, at that time a king named Mahendrasena will rule in Kauśāmbī with a suite of a hundred thousand attendants. When his son is born, he will be wearing armor on his body, have blood on his hands, and be tremendously strong. On the same day, sons will also be born to the king’s five hundred ministers who are wearing armor, have blood on their hands, and are tremendously strong.
$151 “On that day a rain of blood will fall on Kauśāmbī. When the king consults the soothsayers, they will issue a prophecy saying, [268.a] ‘Deva, he will become the sole sovereign over the whole world, but he will slaughter many beings.’
$152 “At the elaborate feast celebrating the birth of the king’s son, they will name him, saying, ‘Since he is infamous and overwhelming, his name will be Duṣprasaha.’ As he grows up, the kings of the barbaric outlying regions will slaughter many people over twelve years and then travel east. When King Mahendrasena hears of it, he will become fearful and unhappy, and the gods will advise him, ‘Let young Duṣprasaha be king, and he will defeat the kings of the barbaric outlying regions once and for all.’
$153 “Thereupon King Mahendrasena will remove the crown and diadem from his head and grant them to young Duṣprasaha, at which point King Duṣprasaha will appoint the sons of Mahendrasena’s five hundred ministers as his chief ministers. He and his five hundred ministers will don their armor and he will lead them into battle against the kings of the barbaric outlying lands.
$154 “They will slaughter the three kings of the barbaric outlying lands along with the hundreds upon hundreds of thousands in their retinue, and he shall become the sole sovereign over the whole world. He shall bring them under his command and then return to Kauśāmbī.
$155 “Lords, at that time in Pāṭaliputra there will appear a brahmin called Agnidatta , a master of the Vedas and the supplements to the Vedas. When the time comes for him to marry, he will take a wife, they will enjoy themselves and couple, and a being will enter his wife’s womb. Then his wife the brahmiṇī will begin to think things like, ‘Wouldn’t it be good to converse with those who debate the scriptures!’ [268.b]
$156 “The brahmin will consult the soothsayers and the soothsayers will say, ‘The being in her womb will understand all the treatises and confound those who debate the scriptures. It is on account of that being that the brahmiṇī has such fervent wishes and thinks, “Wouldn’t it be good to converse with those who debate the scriptures!” ’
$157 “After nine or ten months have passed, she will give birth to a child who is well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. When he is grown, he will master all the treatises and confound those who debate the scriptures. He will act as a master of disciples of the brahmin mantras for five hundred brahmins. He will have many disciples, and therefore he will be called Śiṣyaka.
$158 “Then he will ask for his parents’ permission, go forth in my very doctrine, be educated in the Tripiṭaka, become a proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of wisdom and freedom, and gather around himself a great retinue.
$159 “Lords, at the same time, in Pāṭaliputra a trader called Sudhana will appear. When the time comes for him to marry, he will take a wife, they will enjoy themselves and couple, and a being in its final existence will enter his wife’s womb. The woman will become patient, gentle, peaceable, and calm.
$160 “When the trader Sudhana consults the soothsayers, they will reply, ‘The being who has entered her womb will be gentle. It is on account of that being that your wife has become patient, gentle, peaceable, and calm.’ After nine or ten months have passed, she will give birth to a child who is well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. They will name him Sūrata.
$161 “When he is grown, he will ask for his parents’ permission to go forth in my very doctrine, [269.a] cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. He will have little learning and few desires, be known by all, and make his home in a remote place.
“One day King Duṣprasaha’s father Mahendrasena will die. King Duṣprasaha will take his remains in his hands and cradle them in his lap, grieving and suffering, wailing and lamenting, and there will be no one able to dispel his sorrow.
$162 “Soon thereafter the elder Śiṣyaka and hundreds of his disciples will travel to Kauśāmbī, where he will go before King Duṣprasaha and teach him the Dharma. Hearing it will clear away the king’s sorrows, and he will find faith in the doctrine. Now faithful, he will give the gift of protection to the monks. He will say to the monks, ‘How many years has it been since the Blessed One’s doctrine was destroyed by the kings of the barbaric outlying regions?’ And they will reply, ‘Twelve years.’ Then he will proclaim with a lion’s roar, ‘For twelve years I shall hold a Festival of the Fifth Year of the Doctrine of the Blessed One#161 in Kauśāmbī.’
$163 “When the king inaugurates the Festival of the Fifth Year in Kauśāmbī, on the very day it commences rain will begin to fall, and people the world over will be sated with water, all the way to the ocean’s edge. The many inhabitants of Jambudvīpa will come to Kauśāmbī specifically to celebrate the Festival of the Fifth Year.
$164 “Monks will put all their efforts into working for offerings. They will be fixated on worldly profit and high acclaim. They will indulge themselves on donations given in faith. They will not receive instruction, and neither read nor recite. They will pass their days in gossip [269.b] and their nights in sloth and slumber. They will crave money and acclaim. They will be obsessed with physical hygiene and pour their efforts into their attire. They will have neither renunciation, tranquility, solitude, nor perfect enlightenment. The only thing dear to them will be their outfits.
$165 “Lacking the great virtues of the holy ascetics, and acting as enemies to the holy Dharma and friends with this time of strife, they will lay down the banner of the Dharma and hoist the banner of Māra, snuff out the flame of Dharma and ignite the flame of afflictive emotions, cleave the Dharma drum, grind the wheel of holy Dharma down to dust, let dry up the ocean of holy Dharma, level the mountain of holy Dharma, raze the city of Dharma to the ground, rip out the Dharma tree by its roots, cast aside calm abiding meditation and insight meditation, snip off the adornments of their morality, and repudiate the path.
$166 “Then the gods, nāgas, and yakṣas shall curse, desert, and defeat#162 them, saying, ‘It isn’t right that these lowest of beings spoil the excellent speech of the Blessed One.’ And they will also say:
$167 “ ‘These wretched persons, engulfed in wrong views, Whose sorry misdeeds know no bounds, In their benighted state have felled the Blessed One’s teaching, The fruit-bearing tree, and now it’s gone.
$168 “ ‘The heartless tossed out the Dharma way. The true Dharma they have cast away. In greed, They tore the Dharma banner, the Blessed One’s teaching, Left it on the ground, and now it’s gone.
$169 “ ‘These countless restive, wicked persons In the thrall of sin, these evil ones, Destroyed that bridge, the Sage’s teaching, And now it’s gone.
$170 “ ‘These ignoble persons with shaven heads, Lax in conduct, whose lives are a ploy, Dishonest folk, have destroyed that market, [270.a] The Sage’s teaching, and now it’s gone.
$171 “ ‘Anger, pride, and arrogance Like foul spirits possess them. Fond of money, inhumane—other than evil, They’ve done nothing at all.
$172 “ ‘Now is the time that the holy Dharma is razed. The signs, they tell an awful tale. The virtuous are filled with grief; The teacher, he saw it all.
$173 “ ‘All of what the perfect sage predicted, Everything has come to pass— A trifling remnant of the Sage’s teaching Remained, and now it’s gone.
$174 “ ‘The ocean of the Sage’s teaching Will be a wasteland before long. The wanton, with their vulgar wisdom, Through negligence have done their harm.
$175 “ ‘They don’t know how to serve the just. They cling to faults and abandon good. Like children, fearful when alone, They are never in solitude, ever unaware.
$176 “ ‘These deluded persons, trailing after Nasty masters who were poorly trained, Convinced of what is totally wrong, Have spoiled the Dharma, and now it’s gone.
$177 “After they speak these words, in bitter disappointment never again will the gods, nāgas, and yakṣas look after the monks or shelter them. With the holy Dharma due to vanish in seven days’ time, the gods will be unhappy and hover in the sky, crying out this pronouncement: ‘Friends, seven days from now, when the time comes for the poṣadha purification ceremony, the holy Dharma of the Tathāgata will vanish because of a dispute.’
$178 “Upon hearing this, five hundred lay vow holders of Kauśāmbī will go to the monastery to pacify all the monks’ fighting, faultfinding, quarrels, and disputes, protesting, ‘Alas! The Buddha’s doctrine will vanish soon because of a dispute.’ And they will also say:
$179 “ ‘The Śākya lion’s teaching That gladdened every being Very soon will be destroyed, Crushed beneath the wheel of time. [270.b]
$180 “ ‘Many a thousand hearts are broken. Even the greatest, made of iron—done. The peaceful times are now long past. A dreadful time has come. It’s gone.
$181 “ ‘The wise of the world Have dwindled to none. All the signs upon earth, Whatever forms they take, concur:
$182 “ ‘It’s certain that the doctrine Will fall to ruin before long. Think well, those who wish for happiness, What could be of benefit.
$183 “ ‘Know it now, think well on this— That the true Dharma is vanishing. Where before there was boundless worship Now a mere measure remains.
$184 “Thus the five hundred lay vow holders will come to reflect, ‘Common enjoyments are meaningless. We should do something more meaningful.’ And so, on the very day when the holy Dharma is to disappear, the group of five hundred lay vow holders will provide support for five hundred monasteries. But when it comes time for poṣadha, the five hundred lay vow holders will be occupied and will not be able to go to the monastery.
$185 “Meanwhile the monk Sūrata, living upon Gandhamādana Mountain, will wonder, ‘Where should I go to convene for poṣadha?’ When he looks out toward Jambudvīpa, seeing all the Blessed One’s disciples converging upon Kauśāmbī, he will wish to travel to Kauśāmbī for poṣadha. Among the hundred thousand monks assembled for poṣadha, there will be but a single arhat, the one called Sūrata, and there will be but a single Tripiṭaka master, the one called Śiṣyaka.
$186 “Lords, that will be the final gathering of the Tathāgata’s disciples. One hundred thousand monks will be there. Then the monk in charge of implements will distribute tally sticks among the saṅgha of monks and say to the elder monk Śiṣyaka, ‘Elder brother, now that the saṅgha of monks has convened, we ask you, please recite the Prātimokṣa Sūtra .’
$187 “Śiṣyaka will reply, ‘All the Blessed One’s disciples in Jambudvīpa have come here. [271.a] There are a hundred thousand monks here, and I am the most senior among the entire saṅgha and have completed my study, so if I do not instruct them in the precepts, no one else will instruct them in the precepts. I wonder, for whose sake should I recite the prātimokṣa, then?’ And he will also say:
$188 “ ‘Now, upon the fifteenth night, As the constellations all align, Those monks whose aim is the poṣadha rite Are sitting heedful in their seats.
$189 “ ‘All of the Śākya’s offspring Who dwell in Jambudvīpa Have come to this place. This will be their final convocation.
$190 “ ‘Among the saṅgha of monks, Only I have completed my studies, So if even I am not able to give the precepts, Of course no other person can.
“ ‘So if there are some here Well trained in the precepts Taught by the Lord of Sages, the wise Śākya lion, Please express your qualifications.’
$191 “Then the arhat Sūrata will rise from his seat before the row master, bow toward the saṅgha with palms pressed together, and bid elder monk Śiṣyaka, ‘Elder brother, please recite the Prātimokṣa Sūtra . For in the same way that the great disciples—Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana, and the rest—maintained their precepts perfectly while the Blessed One dwelt among us, I likewise have maintained the doctrine perfectly, some thousand years after the Blessed Buddha passed into parinirvāṇa.’ ”
$192 The Blessed One#163 continued:
“Having listened to the words Spoken by the elder monk, Then Sūrata, the Sugata’s heir, Will speak with a lion’s roar:
$193 “ ‘I have borne the precepts of the Sage, Never wavering. With precision I have learned the precepts of the Teacher’s monastic discipline.’ ”
$194 “Thereupon [271.b] Śiṣyaka’s fearsome disciple Aṅgada will rise to his feet and say, ‘You’re but a newcomer, and one of little learning! How can you speak such nonsense to our preceptor?’ And he will take up a sharp sword to slay the arhat Sūrata.”
$195 The Blessed One continued:
“Śiṣyaka’s disciple Aṅgada, so frightening, Will slay the arhat Sūrata, The Sugata’s very heir.
$196 “Then a yakṣa called Dadhimukha will come there and think, ‘This wicked man has killed the one arhat that was here!’ He will light his vajra scepter on fire and it will burn all over, covered in flames. Wielding nothing but a single, searing flame, he will bludgeon the monk Aṅgada’s head, and split it into seven pieces.”
The Blessed One continued:
$197 “Then the yakṣa Dadhimukha Will wield a blazing scepter And split wicked Aṅgada’s head Into seven pieces.
$198 “The disciples of the arhat Sūrata will rise from their seats, and they will murder the Tripiṭaka master Śiṣyaka, and after the murder of the arhat Sūrata and the Tripiṭaka master Śiṣyaka, the Tathāgata’s holy Dharma will disappear.
$199 “When the holy Dharma disappears, the earth will quake, a meteor will strike, and the thundering of a celestial drum will resound from the heavens. Comets will fall from the four directions, and some hundred thousand gods will cry out in unbearable compassion, wailing and lamenting, ‘What misery! The holy Dharma the Tathāgata cultivated for over three countless eons is no more!’ ”
$200 The Blessed One continued:
“In the very instant The monk Sūrata is slain, The entire surface of the earth Will quake six different ways.
$201 “When the holy Dharma Of the Great Sage vanishes, A great many beings, overcome by suffering, [272.a] Will perish then.
$202 “Yakṣas who once beheld the Buddha And who love the Victor’s teaching, Will fall face-down upon the ground, Crying in lamentation, suffering.
$203 “From this time forth, in all the world The holy Dharma will be no more. Vinaya and prātimokṣa Will not be practiced any more.
$204 “The Dharma bridge, swept away. The stream of Dharma, stopped. What was an ocean, only sand. The Dharma mountaintop, removed.#164 It will be gone.
$205 “The Dharma sacrifice will draw to a close. The Dharma sacrificial pillar, felled. It will be gone. The Dharma’s base will break. It will be gone. The vows shall be no more. They will be gone.
$206 “The Dharma lamp will be snuffed out. The Dharma wheel will halt. It will be gone. The door to deathlessness will be shut. It will be gone. The Dharma preachers will die off. They will be gone.
$207 “The remonstrators of the righteous way, Those superb persons will be destroyed. They will be gone. Not long from now, human vision Will be like that of beasts.
$208 “Thereupon Mahā­māyādevī will descend from her home in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, and cry out in unbearable compassion, wailing and lamenting, ‘What misery! The holy Dharma my son cultivated for over three countless eons has now vanished because of a dispute and is no more!’ And she will also say:
$209 “ ‘Alas! Virtuous Sūrata, The Buddha’s youngest heir, Was killed in a fit of hatred By jealous Aṅgada.
$210 “ ‘The Buddha’s mother, great Māyādevī, So disciplined in manner, Speaks out of pity and sadness, For the holy Dharma is gone.
$211 “ ‘Alas! The doctrine supreme among Gods and humans is destroyed, it’s gone. The Tripiṭaka master Śiṣyaka, And the monk Sūrata both were killed.
$212 “ ‘Thus today the moon fell from the sky, And the sun has left and gone. The sun of the teachings is no more— Now the world is plunged in gloom.
$213 “ ‘The pure disk of the moon Lies in the clutches of Rāhu. A murk, thick and terror-filled, [272.b] Engulfs the whole world now.
$214 “ ‘Today the boat of Dharma, Sailing to the port of nirvāṇa, Was wrecked by Aṅgada And other heartless fools. It’s gone.
$215 “ ‘It is gone without a trace— In its place is irreligion. The māras’ victory call Resounds through Māra’s horde.
$216 “ ‘Now, on the very hill in Videha Where once thundered the lion’s roar, Śakra and his suite of servants Are shot through with pain and sorrow.
$217 “ ‘Today the world, even Brahmāloka, Is defenseless and in despair. Māra and his horde run rampant, Arrogant and unopposed.
$218 “ ‘The Teacher pointed out The way to liberation, and, at the end, he entered nirvāṇa. The Sage’s wings of awakening And paths to liberation are cut. They’re gone.
$219 “ ‘Those who bathed in its waters, Kauṇḍinya and the rest, once were cured and perfected. But today the pool of the Dharma, where the flowers Of the factors of awakening bloomed, has run dry.
$220 “ ‘The assembly of the doctrine—where did it go? The doctrine holders—where have they gone? There is no more joy in Jambudvīpa, And we despair from seeing this today.
$221 “ ‘The Buddha’s children, finely trained, Born of the Dharma King’s speech, Fixed the rudder and abandoned affliction. These eloquent tigers—where have they gone?
$222 “ ‘In every world, the Lord’s children, Who held up the Buddha’s central pillar, Have left the rubbish heaps, ravines, And forests. Where have they gone?
$223 “ ‘Ever since they went away, Like the moon in Rāhu’s clutches, The hermitages have no allure. They’re devoid of any appeal.
$224 “ ‘Trained in knowledge and mores, Adorned with jewels of faith, Patient and kind, Winnowing the ill from good,
$225 “ ‘The supremely intelligent ones, The beings who adorned this land With its monasteries, groves, And stūpas—all are gone.
$226 “ ‘Seeing that the world has lost its guide, In abject suffering and out of pity, The gods and other divine beings Wander, lament, [273.a] and weep.’
$227 “When they hear this, the five hundred lay vow holders in Kauśāmbī will emerge from the monastery, throw up their hands, and lament, ‘The holy Dharma the Tathāgata cultivated for over three countless eons has now vanished into contention and is no more!’ And they will say:
$228 “ ‘Who among the ineloquent persons Of this fearful world Could preach the holy Dharma? Who could transcend sorrow?
$229 “ ‘Light is shrouded in gloom. The deluded wander about, Bereft of the Sage’s teachings, Virtuous deeds cast aside.
$230 “ ‘Lacking sorrow for saṃsāra, they behave like beasts— Nonvirtue is their constant Dharma.’
$231 “When the king of Kauśāmbī hears that the arhat Sūrata and the Tripiṭaka master Śiṣyaka have been killed, in a fit of rage and fury he will attack the teachings, destroying the temples of the saṅgha, demolishing the stūpas, and slaying all the monks.
$232 “Lords, in the future you must band together to protect the teachings wherever they incur harm.”
“We shall,” they said.
$233 “Lord,” the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra declared, “I shall protect the teachings in the east.”
“Lord,” Virūḍhaka declared, “I shall protect the teachings in the south.”
“Lord,” Virūpākṣa declared, “I shall protect the teachings in the west.”
$234 “Lord,” Vaiśravaṇa declared, “I shall protect the teachings in the north.”
“Lord,” Śakra, King of the Gods, declared, “I shall protect the teachings in all directions.”
Having spoken thus, Śakra, King of the Gods, and the four great kings [273.b] praised the words of the Blessed One, rejoiced, touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, and disappeared on the spot.
$235 After the Blessed One had handed the doctrine to Venerable Mahā­kāśyapa and Venerable Ānanda, the monks said to the Blessed Buddha, “Lord, you have seen that after the Blessed One hands the doctrine to the monk Kāśyapa , and the treasury of teachings to the monk Ānanda, and passes into parinirvāṇa, the two will propagate the doctrine.”
$236 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I handed my country and the four divisions of my army to the monk Kāśyapa , and to Ānanda I handed the treasury of my wealth. By safeguarding them after my death, the two made my royal palace flourish. Listen well!
$237 “Monks, in times gone by, when King Mahā­deva reigned in the city of Mithilā, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan. They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake.
$238 “Soon after, the king fell ill. Though he was treated with medicinal roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and fruits, he could not be cured. The king thought, ‘I shall die from this illness, and my son is still very small. After my death, everyone will think, “This child is king?” and they will come to revile him. Who could be powerful enough to maintain the royal palace after I die and pass on?’
$239 “Now the king had two wise chief ministers, capable, clear-minded, [274.a] trustworthy, shrewd, disciplined, and prudent. Their names were Nanda and Upananda . King Mahā­deva thought, ‘After I die and pass on, Nanda and Upananda will be able to safeguard the royal palace.’ With this thought, he summoned both ministers by messenger and then instructed them, ‘The two of you should know that soon I shall be no more. You two will be able to care for the royal palace after I die and pass on.’ The king handed one of them the prince and the royal treasury, and the other the country and the four divisions of the royal army, instructing them, ‘After my passing the two of you must protect the royal palace and ensure that it prospers.’
$240 “Then the king ceded the throne to the prince and passed away. After his passing, the two ministers divided his affairs:#165 one would safeguard the prince and the royal treasury, and the other would safeguard the kingdom and the four divisions of the army.
“When the prince had come into his own and grown strong, one of the two ministers offered him the wealth and the treasury, and the other offered him the country and the four divisions of the army, saying, ‘Deva, this wealth was your father’s. May you therefore rule righteously as king!’
$241 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that aged king, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who safeguarded the four divisions of the army and the country then is none other than the monk Kāśyapa . The one who safeguarded the prince and the royal treasury then is none other than Ānanda. The one who was the prince then is none other than Śāṇavāsa. At that time, I [274.b] handed the prince and my royal treasury to one younger than myself, and to another younger than myself I likewise handed my country and the four divisions of my army.
$242 “At that time, after I died and passed on, they likewise cared for the royal palace and made it prosperous. Now, as I am once again nearing the end, I have handed to one the treasury of teachings, and to the other I have handed the doctrine; after my parinirvāṇa, they will make the doctrine known.
$243 “Furthermore, regarding the monks Ānanda and Kāśyapa , one prayed, ‘May I become supreme among the learned. After the Blessed One’s parinirvāṇa, may I make known the treasury of teachings,’ while the other prayed, ‘After the Śākya sage, foremost King of the Śākyas, passes into parinirvāṇa, may I fulfill the aim of his doctrine.’ ”
“Lord, where did they make these prayers?” the monks inquired.
$244 “Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, the monk Ānanda went forth in his teaching, and the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa commended the one who had led Ānanda to go forth as foremost among keepers of the teachings.
$245 “At that time he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions [275.a] and manifest arhatship. Just as the Buddha Kāśyapa commended my preceptor as foremost among keepers of the teachings, may the Śākya sage, the most excellent King of the Śākyas, likewise commend me as foremost among keepers of the teachings. After his parinirvāṇa may I make known the treasury of his teachings.’
$246 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that monk then is none other than Ānanda himself. At that time he prayed thus, and so it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship; that I have commended him as foremost among keepers of the teachings; and that after my parinirvāṇa, he will make the teachings known.
$247 “Monks, the monk Kāśyapa also went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, and the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa commended the one who had led him to go forth as foremost among those possessing the ascetic practices.
$248 “At that time he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone, may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. [275.b] Just as the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa commended my preceptor as foremost among those possessing the ascetic practices, may the Śākya sage, the most excellent King of the Śākyas, likewise commend me as foremost among those possessing the ascetic practices.’
$249 “When he died and transmigrated, he took rebirth in the city of Vārāṇasī in the family of a chief minister. After his birth, when he had grown, King Kṛkī made him one of his ministers. When the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa had carried out all the activities of a buddha and passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder, King Kṛkī venerated his relics and commissioned a jewel stūpa that was one league in circumference, for which the king appointed as overseer the minister’s son.
$250 “One day, when King Kṛkī had completed every aspect of the stūpa, he wished to inaugurate the traditional festival of the stūpa, so he prepared a large quantity of food, drink, and robes, and extended an invitation to the monks. When seven days had gone by since the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa passed into parinirvāṇa, the doctrine disappeared. After his parinirvāṇa, those monks who had achieved spiritual power also entered parinirvāṇa. Those who were ordinary persons returned to home life. As a result, those who had extended the invitations could not find a single monk.
$251 “ ‘Where have all the monks gone?’ asked King Kṛkī.
“ ‘Now that seven days have passed since the totally and completely awakened Buddha has passed into parinirvāṇa, the doctrine has disappeared,’ the ministers replied.
“ ‘Is there not a single monk who can act as keeper of the doctrine?’ the king asked. [276.a] And with that, King Kṛkī venerated the stūpa and departed.
$252 “Thereupon the minister’s son also venerated the stūpa and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. After his parinirvāṇa may I also become a keeper of the doctrine.’
$253 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the minister’s son then is none other than the monk Kāśyapa . It was at that time that he made this prayer.”
The Story of Son of Grasping
$254 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, there lived certain great brahmin named Grasping . In the village of Nālada there lived another brahmin named Tiṣya. The two were dear friends.
$255 As the brahmin Tiṣya and his wife enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth, they named him Śāriputra Upatiṣya.
$256 Then one day the brahmin Grasping ’s wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since this is the great, high brahmin Grasping ’s child, his [276.b] name will be Son of Grasping.” They reared young Son of Grasping on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids.
$257 When the brahmins’ sons had grown, they were sent to school. Both perfected the study of letters and became educated in all the scriptures. When Śāriputra Upatiṣya was sixteen years of age, being educated in the Aindra school of Sanskrit grammar, he used the scriptures to defeat all his opponents in debate.
$258 One day he went to live in a forest devoted to austerities. He went forth and lived among the mendicant monks known as the parivrājaka. When the Buddha came to the world, the brahmins Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana both went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship. The Blessed One commended the former as foremost among those of profound wisdom and the latter as foremost among those with miraculous powers.
$259 The young brahmin Son of Grasping became a hero in the king’s court. He constantly visited the royal palace, and because he was a wise person, King Bimbisāra appointed him chief minister and awarded him a great salary, since worldly people wish for wealth.
The time came for him to marry, so he took a wife and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. He increased the wealth of their household and kept it all. He accepted money from the brahmins and householders in Rājagṛha on behalf of the king, and he accepted money from the king on behalf of the brahmins and householders.
$260 One day, Śāriputra saw the time had come to tame Son of Grasping. In the morning he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he went to the place where Son of Grasping’s house stood. At that time, the brahmin Son of Grasping [277.a] was seated beneath a mālaka tree, carrying out his cow-milking duties. Son of Grasping saw Venerable Śāriputra in the distance and went to where Venerable Śāriputra stood. He embraced Venerable Śāriputra, led him to the house, and insisted he sit on the seat that he had now prepared for him.
$261 “Śāriputra, as you take your meal, please drink some milk as well.”
“Just your happiness at seeing me is enough for me,” replied Śāriputra.
“Śāriputra, you traveled such a long way to my house. Why is it you won’t take even a little food?” Son of Grasping asked.
“Son of Grasping, I do this because you are becoming increasingly immoral,” replied Śāriputra. “On behalf of the king you accept money from the brahmins and householders, and on behalf of the brahmins and householders you accept money from the king.”
$262 “Śāriputra,” said Son of Grasping, “I am a layman. As a landowner I have to provide for myself, my parents, my children, my spouse, my servants both male and female, and the workers and others to whom I pay wages, as well as those near and dear to me and my aged relatives. I have to keep all of them happy and content. I also have to rely on the king for land. I have to propitiate the deities, put out offerings for the ancestors, and provide food for the ascetics and brahmins. If I do only as the law specifies, I am not able to easily acquire wealth.”
“Well then, Son of Grasping,” Śāriputra replied, “I have a question for you. Just answer as best you can.
$263 “Take a certain person who practices unrighteousness and acts immorally for the sake of his parents. When that person, who practiced unrighteousness and acted so immorally, separates from his body after death and falls to lower states, takes rebirth as a hell being, and is seized by the guardians of hell [277.b] and made to undergo dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony—when that person says, ‘Please, guardians of hell, do not harm me in such-and-such ways! Why not, you ask? It was for the sake of my parents, you see, that I practiced unrighteousness and acted so immorally, and that upon separating from my body after death I fell to lower states and took rebirth among the hell beings’—Son of Grasping, what do you think? Will that person get what he wants from the guardians of hell?”
“No, Śāriputra, he will not,” replied Son of Grasping.
$264 “Son of Grasping,” continued Śāriputra, “there are faithful, noble children who have attained material comfort on account of good karma and a devout life, and who are perfectly content in the service of their parents, going from time to time to offer their genuine respect and gracious assistance. They do not carry out even the smallest nonvirtuous action but embrace the meritorious path and abide by that.
$265 “Their parents think, ‘This noble child is so faithful and capable, and thus able to suitably provide for us. This noble child has attained material comfort on account of good karma and a devout life, and is also perfectly content in our service, coming from time to time to offer genuine respect and gracious assistance. This noble child carries out not even the smallest nonvirtuous action but has embraced the meritorious path and abides by that.’ Such noble children who wholeheartedly love their parents in return should expect their virtuous deeds to only increase, and never wane.
$266 “But, Son of Grasping, take a certain person who practices unrighteousness and acts immorally for the sake of his parents, children, spouse, servants both male and female, and the workers and others to whom he pays wages, as well as for those near and dear to him, his aged relatives, the king, the deities, the ascetics, and brahmins. [278.a]
$267 “When that person, who practiced unrighteousness and acted so immorally, separates from his body after death and falls to lower states, takes rebirth as a hell being, and is seized by the guardians of hell and made to undergo dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony—when that person says, ‘Please, guardians of hell, do not harm me in such-and-such ways! Why not, you ask? It was for the sake of the ascetics and brahmins, you see, that I practiced unrighteousness and acted so immorally’—O Son of Grasping, what do you think? Will that person get what he wants from the guardians of hell?”
“No, Śāriputra, he will not,” replied Son of Grasping.
$268 Śāriputra continued, “Son of Grasping, there are faithful, noble children who have attained material comfort on account of good karma and a devout life, who provide food for the ascetics and brahmins, and who carry out not even the smallest nonvirtuous action but embrace the meritorious path, such that the ascetics and brahmins, with minds of virtue, treat them with wholehearted love in return. So it is, Son of Grasping, that the virtues of people whom ascetics and brahmins, with minds of virtue, treat with wholehearted love in return, are expected to increase, and never wane.”
$269 After he had spoken thus, tears fell from the eyes of the brahmin Son of Grasping. Then the brahmin Son of Grasping, wiping away his tears with the hem of his garment, lamented to Venerable Śāriputra, “Alas, Śāriputra, it was not in times past that I carefully selected my new bride. Yet for her sake, heedless, I have already committed so many sinful misdeeds. Lord, henceforth I will forsake my new bride and today receive from you, Lord Śāriputra, the fundamental precepts of pure conduct.” Thereupon [278.b] Venerable Śāriputra led the brahmin Son of Grasping to abide in the fundamental precepts of the holy life, then rose from his seat and departed.
$270 Venerable Śāriputra traveled to the mountain forests in the south, where there lived another monk who had traveled from the Kalandakanivāsa, in Bamboo Grove, to those mountain forests in the south. That monk saw Venerable Śāriputra in the distance, and approached Venerable Śāriputra. Upon his arrival he touched his head to Venerable Śāriputra’s feet and took a seat at one side. Once the monk had taken a seat at one side, Venerable Śāriputra asked him, “Monk, whence have you just come?”
$271 “Venerable Śāriputra,” the monk replied, “I have just come from the Kalandakanivāsa, in Bamboo Grove.”
“Do you know the brahmin Son of Grasping?” asked Śāriputra.
“Yes, Venerable Śāriputra, I do,” he replied. “He was a friend, Venerable Śāriputra, while you yet lived at home.”
$272 Śāriputra then inquired, “Has Venerable Son of Grasping met with any harm? Does he despair? Is he happy? Is he free of illness, healthy, and strong? Is he living in Rājagṛha? Does he like to see his teacher? Does he enjoy listening to the Dharma?”
“Venerable Śāriputra,” answered the monk, “the brahmin Son of Grasping likes to see his teacher and enjoys listening to the Dharma. However, he met with some harm, and now he suffers. He has fallen ill, and from this illness he may die.”
$273 Venerable Śāriputra donned his Dharma robes and went to the brahmin Son of Grasping’s house. There the brahmin Son of Grasping saw Venerable Śāriputra from a distance, and upon seeing him, tried to rise from his seat. When Venerable Śāriputra saw the brahmin Son of Grasping trying to rise from his seat, he said to him, “Son of Grasping, there is another seat for me to sit on. Please, don’t get up.” [279.a]
$274 Venerable Śāriputra sat on the seat prepared for him and asked the brahmin Son of Grasping, “Son of Grasping, tell me, are you able to endure? Are you recovering? Tell me, has your dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony gone away and not gotten worse? Has it abated? Has it not calmed down?”
$275 “Lord Śāriputra,” said Son of Grasping, “I cannot endure this. I am not recovering. My body is wracked with dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony. The pain has worsened, and it seems that the illness will not abate.
$276 “Lord Śāriputra, take a very weak person, around whose head a very strong person has tied thick leather rope very tightly. The pain in that person’s head would be unbearable. Lord Śāriputra, in my head there is an unbearable pain like this. The pain has worsened, and it seems that the illness will not abate.
$277 “Lord Śāriputra, take for instance the belly of a cow gutted by a butcher’s apprentice with a slaughtering knife. As its stomach is ripped open, the pain would be unbearable. Lord Śāriputra, my stomach is rent with an unbearable pain like this. The pain has worsened, and it seems that the illness will not abate.
$278 “Lord Śāriputra, take for instance a very weak person whose shoulders are gripped right and left by two very strong persons who push him down into burning embers. The pain in that person’s body would be searing and unbearable. Lord Śāriputra, my body is filled with pain that is searing and unbearable like this. The pain has worsened, and it seems that the illness will not abate.
“That is why, Lord Śāriputra, I cannot endure it. I am not recovering. My body is wracked with dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable [279.b] agony, the pain has worsened, and it seems that the illness will not abate.”
$279 “Son of Grasping,” Śāriputra said, “I have some questions for you. Just answer as best you can. O Son of Grasping, what do you think? Which would you choose, rebirth as a hell being or as an animal?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as an animal over rebirth as a hell being.”
$280 “Which would you choose, rebirth as an animal or as an anguished spirit?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as an anguished spirit over an animal birth.”
$281 “Which would you choose, rebirth as an anguished spirit or as a human?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a human over rebirth as an anguished spirit.”
$282 “Which would you choose, rebirth as a human or a god in the Abodes of the Four Great Kings?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a god in the Abodes of the Four Great Kings over a human birth.”
$283 “Which would you choose, rebirth as a god in the Abodes of the Four Great Kings or as a god in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a god in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three over being a god in the Abodes of the Four Great Kings.”
$284 “Which would you choose, rebirth as a god in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three or as a god in the Strifeless Heaven?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a god in the Strifeless Heaven over being a god in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.”
$285 “Which would you choose, rebirth as a god in the Strifeless Heaven or as a god in Tuṣita?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a god in Tuṣita over rebirth as a god in the Strifeless Heaven.”
$286 “Which would you choose, rebirth as a god in Tuṣita or as a god in the Delighting in Creation Heaven?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a god in the Delighting in Creation Heaven over rebirth as a god in the Tuṣita Heaven.”
$287 “Which would you choose, rebirth as a god in the Delighting in Creation Heaven or as a god in the Heaven of the Masters of Others’ Creations?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a god in the Heaven of the Masters of Others’ Creations over rebirth as a god in the Delighting in Creation Heaven.”
$288 “Which would you choose, rebirth as a god in the Heaven of the Masters of Others’ Creations or as a god in Brahmāloka?”
“Lord Śāriputra, I would choose rebirth as a god in Brahmāloka over rebirth as a god in the Heaven of the Masters of Others’ Creations.”
$289 “Son of Grasping, did you say that you would choose Brahmāloka?”
“Yes, Lord Śāriputra, I did say that I would choose Brahmāloka.”
For a moment Son of Grasping did not say anything. Then he asked Śāriputra, “Lord Śāriputra, now that I’ve chosen Brahmāloka over god in the Heaven of the Masters of Others’ Creations, [280.a] is there a path that leads to rebirth in Brahmāloka?”
$290 “Yes, Son of Grasping, there is a way. There is a path. Faithful sons and daughters of good lineage who in greater part remain in meditation upon it, casting away all yearning for their desires, will be born into worlds equal in fortune to Brahmāloka. If I explain it to you, will you be able to understand?”
“Tell me, Lord Śāriputra, and I shall listen.”
$291 “Son of Grasping, noble listeners cast aside generating the subsidiary afflictive emotions toward the five sense pleasures, cast aside the tendency that perpetuates ignoble states of existence, and cast aside the tendency for conflict that keeps them from passing beyond suffering. Their minds are suffused with love, and they become magnanimous—without hostility, envy, or ill will.
$292 “By meditating deeply on the nondual and the immeasurable, they devote themselves to the first of the cardinal directions, until they have pervaded it to its very end, and abide therein, their minds suffused with love for the whole world in all its aspects. In the very same way, whether in the second, third, or fourth of the cardinal directions, above, below, or straight ahead, they become magnanimous—without hostility, envy, or ill will. They meditate deeply on the nondual and the immeasurable and devote themselves to a single cardinal direction, pervading it to its very end, and abide therein.”
$293 Śāriputra went on to also explain this in detail with regard to compassion, joy, and great equanimity.
“Son of Grasping, this is the way, this is the path. Faithful sons and daughters of a good lineage who in greater part remain in meditation on it and cast away all yearning for their desires will be born into worlds equal in fortune to Brahmāloka.” Having thus led Son of Grasping to abide in the four immeasurables, Venerable Śāriputra departed.
$294 As soon as Venerable Śāriputra had gone, the Blessed One thought, “The truths as the monk Śāriputra told them to Son of Grasping [280.b] are not complete.” Having thought this, he disappeared from Bamboo Grove and appeared sitting in the house of the brahmin Son of Grasping.
$295 The brahmin Son of Grasping saw the Blessed One sitting there upon a cushion, and he experienced a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he rose from his own seat and stood. Then the Blessed One taught him the Dharma particularly suited to him, and the brahmin Son of Grasping manifested the resultant state of non-return right where he sat.
$296 After the Blessed One had placed the brahmin Son of Grasping in the resultant state of non-return, he disappeared from the home of Son of Grasping, and before Śāriputra was able to reach Bamboo Grove, the Blessed One arrived and took his seat at Bamboo Grove.
Soon after the Blessed One had departed, the brahmin Son of Grasping died, transmigrated, and took birth in Brahmāloka.
$297 Venerable Śāriputra went to see the Blessed One. When he arrived, he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side. Then the Blessed One asked Venerable Śāriputra, “Śāriputra, whence have you just come?”
“Lord,” replied Venerable Śāriputra, “I have just come from leading the brahmin Son of Grasping to dwell in the four immeasurables.”
$298 “Śāriputra,” the Blessed One asked further, “why did you not teach the truths to the brahmin Son of Grasping? Had he understood that teaching, he would have realized the Dharma and Vinaya. Śāriputra, after you left, I disappeared from Bamboo Grove and went to the house of the brahmin Son of Grasping and taught him the truths. He manifested the resultant state of non-return, and soon after, he died, transmigrated, and took birth in Brahmāloka. [281.a] After leading Son of Grasping to abide in the truths, I returned to Bamboo Grove before you had arrived here.”
$299 Venerable Śāriputra replied to the Blessed One, “Lord, it is wonderful that the blessed buddhas possess such wonderful Dharma.”
“Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “what action did the brahmin Son of Grasping take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” replied The Blessed One.
$300 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times gone by, during the reign of King Nāgadeva in the city of Ayodhyā, the kingdom was prosperous, flourishing, happy, and well populated. Quarreling and arguments had ceased, there was no fighting or infighting, and there were no robbers, thieves, illness, or famine. Rice, sugarcane, cattle, and buffalo were plentiful. His was a reign in accord with the Dharma. He ruled the kingdom gently and mercifully, as a parent cares for a beloved only child.
$301 “At that time in the city of Strifeless, King Nāgadeva had a certain magistrate, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. He accepted money from the brahmins and householders on behalf of the king, and he accepted money from the king on behalf of the brahmins and householders.
$302 “Now at that time there was also a certain poor brahmin who happened to be standing not too far from the brahmin magistrate just as the brahmin magistrate accepted money from brahmins and householders on behalf of the king [281.b] and accepted money from the king on behalf of the brahmins and householders. Because he did this, the magistrate was able to stay up on the roof of his palatial home in the company of only women, playing music, enjoying himself, and coupling with them.
$303 “The poor brahmin thought, ‘All the glorious experiences he’s having are the result of three types of actions: giving, ethical discipline, and keeping one’s vows perfectly. I will make sure to take up just a fraction of his virtuous qualities and maintain it, and my poverty will come to an end.’ Such were the thoughts he had.
$304 “Now in times when a blessed one has not arisen in the world, the solitary buddhas appear. So it was that a solitary buddha came to his door. When the poor brahmin saw the solitary buddha from a distance, he felt a surge of joy toward him. In his joy the brahmin offered alms to the solitary buddha.
$305 “Those great beings do not teach the Dharma with words but through their actions, so the sage accepted the alms and rose into the sky. This caused the brahmin particular delight, and, bowing down at his feet, he prayed, ‘Oh, by this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I, on behalf of the king, accept money from the brahmins and householders, and on behalf of the brahmins and householders, accept money from the king. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this.’
$306 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that poor brahmin then is none other than Son of Grasping. The act of offering alms to a solitary buddha and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever he was born, [282.a] it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that he accepted money from the brahmin householders on behalf of the king, and accepted money from the king on behalf of the brahmins and householders.
$307 “Monks, I am more exalted than even one hundred billion solitary buddhas, and now he has pleased me and not displeased me.
“He also became a lay vow holder in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and went for refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life. Then, at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$308 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that lay vow holder then is none other than Son of Grasping. At that time he went for refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$309 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me and not displeased me.”
The Story of Subhadra the Mendicant
$310 Among#166 the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, in the retinue of Śakra, king of the gods, there was a certain gandharva king named Supriya. Supriya would sing songs about Śakra, king of the gods, much to Śakra’s delight.
$311 Now when the Bodhisattva, having looked out upon the world and made the four observations from his place in Tuṣita Heaven,#167 [282.b] entered his mother’s womb, at that time Śakra, king of the gods, said to the gandharva king Supriya, “Supriya, a certain bodhisattva has passed away from Tuṣita Heaven, transmigrated, and reincarnated in his mother’s womb. After he is born and has grown, he will gain the nectar of immortality and satiate living beings. You should also take birth in Jambudvīpa so that he might also grant you a share of the nectar of immortality.”
“Kauśika,” Supriya told him, “I have just begun composing a song, but once it is finished, I shall go.”
$312 At that time in the city of Kuśinagarī, all the young athletes of Kuśinagarī held in high esteem a mendicant named Subhadra, a person of miracles. They revered, honored, venerated, and admired him. He spent his days on the banks of Lake Anavatapta, and the gods and nāgas there held him in high esteem, accepted him as their guru, and honored and venerated him.
Sometimes he would spend the entire day on the banks of Lake Anavatapta. At other times he went and sat in a forest of udumbara trees, not far from the lake.
$313 When the Bodhisattva was born, Śakra, King of the Gods, said to the gandharva king Supriya, “Supriya, now that the Bodhisattva has been born, come!#168 Let us make an effort to offer him our adoration.”
“Kauśika,” Supriya told him, “I have just begun composing a song, but once it is finished, I shall go.”
$314 Through the greatness of the Bodhisattva, there in the udumbara forest the udumbara flowers began to bloom. The mendicant Subhadra saw that the udumbara flowers were blooming and was thrilled at the sight. He thought, “The mendicants of old are aged and infirm now. It was from the great masters of their school [283.a] that I heard that tathāgatas, arhats, totally and completely awakened buddhas, universal monarchs, and udumbara flowers arise but rarely. It is on account of my merit that the udumbara flowers in the udumbara forest are blooming.”
$315 When the Bodhisattva witnessed old age, sickness, and death and went to live in the charnel grounds, Śakra, king of the gods, said to the gandharva king Supriya, “Supriya, the Bodhisattva has witnessed old age, sickness, and death, and has gone to live in the forest. Let us make an effort to offer him our adoration.”
“Kauśika,” Supriya told him, “I have just begun composing a song, but once it is finished, I shall go.”
$316 When the Bodhisattva achieved unexcelled wisdom, he enumerated the four truths of noble beings three times over, setting in proper motion the Dharma wheel in its twelve aspects, and Śakra said again to the gandharva king Supriya, “Supriya, the Blessed One has achieved unexcelled enlightenment, enumerated the four truths of noble beings three times over, and set the Dharma wheel in its twelve aspects in proper motion. Let us go to listen to the Dharma.”
“Kauśika,” Supriya told him, “I have just begun composing a song, but once it is finished, I shall go.”
$317 When the Blessed One enumerated the four truths of noble beings three times over and set the Dharma wheel in its twelve aspects in proper motion, all the flowers in the udumbara forest began to bloom, and their fragrance spread for many leagues. This caused the mendicant Subhadra particular delight, and he thought, “It is on account of my merit that all this has happened.”
$318 When the Blessed One enumerated the four truths of noble beings three times over and set the Dharma wheel in its twelve aspects in proper motion, [283.b] he also tamed the group of five friends, the group of five close friends, and the group of fifty of the city’s young elite.
When he traveled to the cottonwood forest he established sixty of his paternal relatives in the truths.
$319 When he traveled to the village of Serika#169 he established young Nandā and Nandabalā, who lived there in that village, in the truths.
When he traveled to Uruvilvā he led the one thousand longhaired ascetics to go forth as novices and then conferred on them full ordination.
$320 When he traveled to the stūpa at Gayāśīrṣa he won the trust of thousands of monks with three miraculous transformations, and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$321 When he traveled to the Forest of Reeds he established Śreṇiya Bimbisāra, King of Magadha, along with eighty thousand gods and hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of the householders of Magadha, in the truths.
$322 When he traveled to Rājagṛha he accepted the gift of Bamboo Grove, led Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana, and their suites of two hundred and fifty attendants to go forth as novices, and then conferred on them full ordination.
$323 When he traveled to Śrāvastī he accepted the gift of the garden of Prince Jeta, made a great display of miracles, and led Cunda to go forth as a novice, who then cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.
$324 After that, Cunda used his miraculous powers as a means of travel and, traveling from place to place, would scoop flowers and fruits onto large leaves, carry them from one place to another, and bring them as offerings to his preceptor and to the saṅgha.
$325 So it was that one day he traveled to the banks of Lake Anavatapta. He was very happy to be there and stayed the whole day until the mendicant Subhadra said, “My friend, this is where I spend the day. Please don’t stay here.”
“This place is open to everyone,” the novice Cunda replied.
$326 “Let us have a contest of miracles,” proposed the mendicant Subhadra said. “Whoever wins can spend the day here.”
The two began their competition in the display of miracles, [284.a] and the novice Cunda defeated the mendicant Subhadra, who, quite chagrined, went back to dwelling in the udumbara forest.
$327 When the Blessed One had carried out all the activities of a buddha, he traveled to the city of Kuśinagarī, where he took to his final bed. The Blessed One thought, “Now there are two disciples that the Tathāgata should tame—the mendicant Subhadra, and the gandharva king Supriya.” The Blessed One also thought, “I can easily tame the mendicant Subhadra, but since the gandharva king Supriya is arrogant and aloof, he will not come to see me, so I will go to him.”
$328 The Blessed One left behind an emanation, disappeared from the copse of two śāla trees, and traveled to the Heaven of the Thirty-Three where he arrived at the gates of the palace of the gandharva king Supriya. The Blessed One thought, “After I shatter his ego, he will become a vessel for the truths.” Then, to tame him, the Blessed One magically manifested himself as a gandharva king bearing a lute with a hundred thousand strings of blue beryl, went up to the gate of the gandharva king Supriya, and sent a message, saying, “A gandharva king stands at the gates. He wishes to play the lute with you.”
$329 As soon as he heard this, the gandharva king Supriya thought, “What? There can’t be another gandharva king! I shall eliminate him.” With this thought, he said, “Call him inside! I will show him what I can do.”
$330 Once he had been invited inside they began to play their lutes together. Then, to tame him, the Blessed One cut a single string from his own lute. The gandharva king Supriya, noticing this, cut one string from his lute as well. Then the Blessed One gradually cut all the strings from his lute, until only one remained, from which [284.b] every note continued to sound. So Supriya also cut away all his strings, and likewise made every note sound from a single string.
$331 Then the Blessed One cut even that lone remaining string, yet every note continued to sound.
The gandharva king Supriya thought, “I cannot do any more than this. So be it—he is far better than I.”
$332 The Blessed One directly apprehended that Supriya’s arrogance was gone, and that he no longer thought, “There is no one like me!” Having thus shattered Supriya’s ego, the Blessed One assumed his natural form.
$333 When he saw the Blessed One, Supriya experienced a surge of joy. In his joy he bowed down at the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly.
$334 When he heard it, the gandharva king Supriya destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$335 After the Blessed One disappeared from among the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the flowers of the udumbara forest began to fade. The mendicant Subhadra saw that the flowers of the udumbara forest were fading, and great sorrow arose in him. He thought, “It is on account of my merit that flowers bloomed throughout the udumbara forest, but now that I am old and infirm, 120 years of age, the flowers of the udumbara forest are fading. It is certain, then—I shall die before long.” At this the mendicant began to grieve and suffer greatly, wailing and lamenting.
$336 Thereupon a god who was fond of Subhadra [285.a] said to him, “It was not at all on account of your merit that the flowers in the udumbara forest bloomed, for this place is the royal garden of a great universal monarch. The flowers in the udumbara forest first blossom whenever a universal monarch or a bodhisattva appears. Whenever a universal monarch is enthroned on his royal seat or a bodhisattva achieves unexcelled wisdom, flowers fully bloom throughout the udumbara forest. Whenever the time is near for the passing of the universal monarch or for the Tathāgata to pass into parinirvāṇa, the flowers of the udumbara forest begin to fade. When the universal monarch passes or the Tathāgata enters parinirvāṇa, the flowers of the udumbara forest wither.
$337 “Now the Tathāgata is in the world, and he has taken to his final bed. Tonight, in the middle of the night, he will pass beyond sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. This is why the udumbara forest is fading. Do not mourn so. Do not suffer so. Do not lament.”
$338 The mendicant Subhadra thought, “I have doubts about the Dharma, but I have hope that the Blessed Gautama can dispel my doubts. I will go see the Blessed Gautama, and if he agrees to answer my questions, I shall ask some questions of him.” So he disappeared from the udumbara forest and traveled to the copse of two śāla trees near Kuśinagarī.
$339 At that time Venerable Ānanda drew near to the gates of Kuśinagarī and seated himself. The mendicant Subhadra saw Venerable Ānanda from a distance, and went to where Venerable Ānanda was. Upon his arrival he said to Venerable Ānanda, “Lord Ānanda, I [285.b] have heard that tonight, in the middle of the night, the Blessed One will pass beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. I have doubts about the Dharma but I have hope that the Blessed Gautama can dispel my doubts. Oh Lord Ānanda, if it’s no trouble, I will go see the Blessed Gautama, and if he agrees to answer my questions when I arrive, I will ask some questions of him.”
$340 Venerable Ānanda, being skilled in the interpretation of signs, thought, “The Blessed One has left an emanation here, and departed using his powers of subjugation.” Understanding this, he said to the mendicant Subhadra, “Relent, Subhadra. The Blessed One is tired, the Tathāgata is tired. Don’t trouble the Tathāgata.”
$341 The mendicant Subhadra said to Venerable Ānanda, “Lord Ānanda, the mendicants of old are aged and infirm now. It was from them that I heard that the tathāgatas, the arhats, the totally and completely awakened buddhas emerge in the world but rarely, like the udumbara flower. If tonight, in the middle of the night, the Blessed Gautama will pass beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates, then since I have some doubts about the Dharma and hope that the Blessed Gautama can dispel my doubts, and if it’s no trouble, Lord Ānanda, let me go see the Blessed Gautama. If he agrees to answer my questions when I arrive, I will ask some questions of him.”
Three times Ānanda answered the mendicant Subhadra, “Relent, Subhadra. The Blessed One is tired, the Tathāgata is tired. [286.a] Don’t trouble the Tathāgata.”
$342 At that very moment the Blessed One disappeared from among the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and took to his bed. With his perfectly clear divine hearing, which transcends that of normal humans, the Blessed One heard the words that Venerable Ānanda was speaking to the mendicant Subhadra and the Blessed One instructed Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, send him in. Send the mendicant Subhadra inside, and do not impede him. Let him ask whatever he likes. This is the last occasion on which I shall address those who hold extreme views, and this mendicant, Subhadra, will be the last monk I shall lead to go forth with the words ‘Come, monk!’ ”
$343 The mendicant Subhadra was joyful, overjoyed, and elated that the Blessed One had granted this opportunity. In his jubilation, joy, and gladness he went to see the Blessed One. Upon his arrival he made all manner of entertaining and jovial conservation with the Blessed One, then took a seat at one side.
$344 Once he had taken a seat at one side, the mendicant Subhadra said to the Blessed One, “Gautama, in the world people hold many different kinds of extreme views, such as those of Pūraṇa Kāśyapa , Parivrājaka Gośālīputra, Saṃjayin Vairaṭīputra, Ajita Keśakambala, Kakuda Kātyāyana, and Nirgrantha Jñātiputra, each of them with their own sacred pledges.”
Then the Blessed One responded in verse, saying:
$345 “Subhadra, at twenty-nine I went forth to seek the good.
$346 “Subhadra, after going forth, I cultivated concentration for fifty years.
$347 “I cultivated ethics, proper conduct, wisdom, And single-pointed concentration. [286.b]
$348 “Ascetics from other factions do not even have A measure of the correct Dharma I expound.
$349 “Subhadra, a Dharma and Vinaya in which there is no noble eightfold path lacks even the first monastic practitioner, and lacks the second, third, and fourth as well.#170 Subhadra, a Dharma and Vinaya that includes the noble eightfold path has the first monastic practitioner, and the second, third, and fourth as well. That is why I have said that there are no ascetics or brahmins of other factions, for espousing false doctrines, they are devoid of ascetics and brahmins. With a lion’s perfect roar I proclaim this before the assembly.”
$350 When this Dharma teaching had been explained, the mendicant Subhadra was able to see these things unobscured, with the Dharma vision that has no trace of dust or stain with respect to phenomena. Subhadra perceived the truths, discovered the truths, realized the truths, and fathomed the truths to their very depths, until he overcame whatever doubts or hesitation he had.
$351 Then of his own accord, completely unprompted, and unafraid of the truths his teacher had taught him, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and said to Venerable Ānanda, “Lord Ānanda, you have achieved much that is good. Lord Ānanda, you have been empowered as a great master by the great master himself. Similarly, I have achieved much that is good. If permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$352 Venerable Ānanda rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and asked the Blessed One, “Lord, this mendicant wishes to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete his novitiate, and achieve full ordination. [287.a] I would like to request the Blessed One out of compassion to lead him to go forth.”
$353 Then the Blessed One said to the mendicant Subhadra, “Come, monk! Practice the holy life.”
As soon as the Blessed One had finished speaking there he stood, alms bowl and water pitcher in hand, with but a week’s worth of hair and beard, and with the deportment of a monk who had been ordained for one hundred years. As it is stated:
$354 Garbed in robes, with shaven heads, And senses stilled by Buddha’s will— From the very moment the One Thus Gone Spoke to them, saying, “Come, join me.”
$355 Then the Blessed One conferred on him instruction, and, casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$356 The thought occurred to Venerable Subhadra, “It is not my fate that I should see our teacher pass into parinirvāṇa, so I will make the following fivefold resolve:
“With the thought that I might enter nirvāṇa before the Buddha, may fellow practitioners of the holy life see me as a monk, and may those who hold extreme views see me as one who holds extreme views.
$357 “May fellow practitioners of the holy life find it easy to come and see me, and may others who hold extreme views see me as surrounded by a great mass of water.
“May fellow practitioners of the holy life [287.b] bear my relics on a palanquin, and may their opponents, be there even hundreds or thousands of them, not be able to lift them.
$358 “May fellow practitioners of the holy life kindle the fire to burn my relics, and may their opponents, be there even hundreds or thousands of them, not be able to light it.
“May fellow practitioners of the holy life view my relics, and upon doing so, may they venerate my relics, and may others who hold extreme views not be able to view them.”
$359 After Venerable Subhadra had made this fivefold resolve, he passed into parinirvāṇa. All the gods in Kuśinagarī proclaimed that Subhadra had passed into parinirvāṇa, and as soon as the philosophical extremists heard this they hoisted banners made of cotton, announcing on the highways, in the streets, at crossroads, and at forks in the road, “The ascetic Gautama claims there are no ascetics or brahmins from other factions, for they are proponents of other views devoid of ascetics and brahmins. With a lion’s perfect roar he proclaimed this before the assembly.” They went all over Kuśinagarī, proclaiming, “This practitioner of our code of conduct has now passed into parinirvāṇa!” Then they went to the copse of two śāla trees where Subhadra lay, but they were unable to enter. The monks saw them and asked, “What are you doing here?”
$360 “Our friend, who practiced our code of conduct, has passed into parinirvāṇa. We have come to venerate his relics,” they replied.
“It was our code of conduct he practiced, not yours,” the monks said. “Didn’t you see him with a shaved head, wearing holy robes and patched raiment?”
“We saw him carrying three sticks and a ritual vase,” they replied.
$361 “If you believe he was practicing your code of conduct, then go ahead with your veneration,” said the monks.
When they heard this the extremists [288.a] wished to go see Subhadra, but they found he was surrounded by a great mass of water and could not proceed.
$362 “It was our code of conduct he practiced, not yours,” the monks said to them. “Thus it is easy for us to approach him. You may go to see him, with our consent.” So they all went to where Subhadra’s relics lay.
The monks said, “If you think he was practicing your disciplines, then carry his palanquin.” As soon as the extremists heard this, they all said, “We will carry Subhadra’s palanquin!” but found they were unable to lift it.
$363 “It was our code of conduct he practiced,” said the monks, “so we will carry his palanquin and pay him homage—look here!” And the monks carried his palanquin. After they placed it in the charnel grounds the monks said, “If you think he was practicing your disciplines, then kindle the fire to burn his relics.”
“We’ll light the fire to burn his relics!” the extremists said, but they were unable to light the fire.
$364 “It was our code of conduct he practiced,” said the monks, “so we will light the fire to burn his relics.” After they said this, the monks lit the fire to burn his relics. Then they continued, “If you think he was practicing your disciplines, extinguish the fire burning his relics with milk.”
“We’ll extinguish the fire burning his relics!” the extremists said, but they were not able to put it out.
$365 “It was our code of conduct he practiced,” said the monks, “so we will extinguish the fire burning his relics,” and they extinguished the fire burning his relics.
After extinguishing the fire, they continued, “If you think he was practicing your disciplines, take up his relics and venerate them.”
$366 The extremists [288.b] said, “We’ll take up his relics!” but they couldn’t see the relics, so the monks collected the relics, placed them in a stūpa, and venerated it with incense, incense powders and cones, and flowers.
$367 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why Venerable Subhadra, after going forth last of all, was first to pass into parinirvāṇa, and how the Blessed One will now pass into parinirvāṇa after him.”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$368 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks,” recounted the Blessed One, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, King Kṛkī reigned in the city of Vārāṇasī. At that time King Kṛkī’s magistrate had a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with glowing, golden skin and a well-rounded head, long arms, a broad brow, a fine and prominent nose, and eyebrows that met, graced with the thirty-two signs of great persons, and embellished by the eighty minor marks of perfection. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, ‘What name should we give this child?’ And they named him, saying, ‘Since this is a child of the Kāśyapa clan, his name will likewise be Kāśyapa.’
$369 “They reared young Kāśyapa on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and when he had grown, the soothsayers and augurs made this prediction: ‘If young Kāśyapa does not go forth, he will become a universal monarch, but if he shaves his head and face and dons the colorful religious robes, and if with nothing short of perfect faith he goes forth from home to live as a mendicant, then he will be renowned throughout the world as a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha.’ [289.a]
$370 “Bodhisattva Kāśyapa’s best friend was a young brahmin named Aśoka. When he heard the prophecy he said, ‘My friend, do not end our friendship to go live in a forest for practicing austerities.’ The Bodhisattva, in reference to his passing into nirvāṇa, said, ‘As long as we are friends, I shall not go.’ So Aśoka was very unhappy when Bodhisattva Kāśyapa went to live in the forest after witnessing old age, sickness, and death and thought, ‘He didn’t do as he promised.’
$371 “After Bodhisattva Kāśyapa achieved unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment and traveled to Vārāṇasī, where he thrice turned the Dharma wheel in its twelve aspects, he was invited for food by King Kṛkī. That night the king arranged for the road to be beautified and prepared many good, wholesome foods. In the morning he rose, prepared seats, and filled the water pots. Then the king sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him of the time, and, bearing burning sticks of incense, incense powders, and incense cones, flowers, parasols, banners, and flags, amid a crashing of cymbals, he set out from Ṛṣivadana. He greeted the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa with great opulence and invited him to Vārāṇasī.
$372 “The young brahmin Aśoka heard that Bodhisattva Kāśyapa had achieved unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. He heard that the Bodhisattva had traveled to Vārāṇasī where he was invited for food by King Kṛkī, and that King Kṛkī had arranged for the road to be beautified, had prepared many good, wholesome foods that night, and then had risen in the morning, prepared seats, and filled the water pots. He heard that the king had sent the Blessed One a message reminding him of the time; that he had borne burning sticks of incense, incense powders, and incense cones, [289.b] parasols, banners, and flags, amid a crashing of cymbals; that he had set out from Ṛṣivadana; and that he had greeted the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa with great opulence and invited him to Vārāṇasī. After hearing all this, because he was so upset before, he sat at a distance and looked on, not wishing to approach.
$373 “The totally and completely awakened Buddha focused his mind and, extending his arm like an elephant’s trunk, grasped him and drew him near, saying, ‘Aśoka, why don’t you wish to come meet me?’
“ ‘You promised that wherever you went, you would bring me with you,’ he replied. ‘But even after your promise, you departed alone for a forest devoted to austerities. I didn’t come because I was so upset before.’
$374 “The totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa explained, ‘It was in reference to my passing into nirvāṇa that I spoke thus. Now the time has come to keep my promise. What use would it have been if you had already gone to nirvāṇa?’#171
“ ‘Lord,’ Aśoka said, ‘if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$375 “With the words ‘Come, join me, monk!’ the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. But as he pondered the instructions, he became lazy, and merely lay about. Then, when the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa spoke in praise of solitude, he took it to heart and went into solitude.
$376 “While he was staying there, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa carried out all the activities of a buddha and took to his final bed. Thereupon the gods proclaimed to all, ‘This very night, in the middle of the night, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa will pass beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates.’ [290.a]
$377 “The monk Aśoka heard what the gods said as they flew through the sky, and became very upset. ‘Now the Blessed One will pass into nirvāṇa,’ he thought, ‘and I have not achieved anything of significance.’ He began to grieve and suffer greatly, wailing and lamenting.
$378 “A god who was fond of him saw him and asked, ‘O Aśoka, why do you grieve and suffer so, wailing and lamenting? What would you do if you could go see the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa?’
“ ‘Whatever the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa has said in his teachings should be done. I would do it all,’ Aśoka replied.
$379 “No sooner had the god heard this than he picked him up and set him down right in front of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Aśoka approached the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, and upon his arrival he touched his head to his feet and took a seat at one side. Then the Blessed One taught him the Dharma particularly suited to him, and when he heard it, he cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship right where he sat.
$380 “Upon achieving arhatship, Aśoka thought, ‘It is not my fate that I should see our teacher pass into parinirvāṇa. I will pass into parinirvāṇa before him.’ And after Aśoka had passed into parinirvāṇa, the totally and completely awakened Kāśyapa too passed into parinirvāṇa.
$381 “The god thought, ‘Anything of significance he achieved was on account of my powers,’ and he prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May I go forth in his doctrine alone, and may my teacher pass into parinirvāṇa only after I pass into parinirvāṇa before him.’ [290.b]
$382 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the god then is none other than Subhadra. At that time he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. May my teacher pass into parinirvāṇa only after I pass into parinirvāṇa before him.’
$383 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
“Because he also prayed, ‘May my teacher pass into parinirvāṇa only after I pass into parinirvāṇa before him,’ it is only now, after he has passed into parinirvāṇa, that I too shall pass into parinirvāṇa.
$384 “Furthermore, monks, in times gone by, some five hundred sages were living deep in a certain forest. In that particular forest there also lived a god who was very fond of the sages. At that time the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Krakucchanda was in the world.
$385 “At that time the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda also happened to be teaching before a great gathering, of which the god was a part. After hearing the Dharma from the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda, he went to live deep in the forest, where he spoke the praises of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda to the sages. [291.a] As soon as they heard him, the sages were eager to see the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda, and they prayed fervently to the god, until they were able to#172 travel to where the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda was.
$386 “All five hundred sages saw the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When they saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled them with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$387 “Filled with such joy, they went to where the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda was, and upon their arrival they touched their heads to his feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. Then the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda, directly apprehending their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, taught them the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the five hundred sages realized the truths and immediately manifested the resultant state of non-return right where they sat.
$388 “After seeing the truths, they requested, ‘Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.’
“By speaking the words ‘Come, join me, monks!’ to the five hundred sages, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda [291.b] led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
$389 “As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$390 “When the totally and completely awakened Krakucchanda had carried out all the activities of a buddha and wished to pass beyond all sorrow in the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates, he took to his final bed. The five hundred monks thought, ‘It wouldn’t be right to see our teacher pass into parinirvāṇa. We should pass into parinirvāṇa before him.’ And after all five hundred monks passed into parinirvāṇa, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda too passed into parinirvāṇa.
$391 “The god prayed, ‘Whatever great virtues they achieved were on account of my powers, so by this root of virtue, may I please and not displease a teacher just like this one. May I go forth in his doctrine alone, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship, and may my teacher pass into parinirvāṇa only after I have passed into parinirvāṇa.’
$392 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that god then [292.a] is none other than Subhadra. Monks, because of his prayers, and now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship. And it is only now, after he has passed into parinirvāṇa, that I too shall pass into parinirvāṇa.”
$393 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why, as the Blessed One was deathly ill, he protected Venerable Subhadra, then established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, as I was sick unto death, I brought him out of danger and established him in a state of fearlessness. Listen well!
“Monks, in times gone by, King Brahmadatta reigned in the city of Vārāṇasī. King Brahmadatta had a certain extraordinarily clever horse. Because of its abilities, King Brahmadatta was able to collect taxes from all the different neighboring kingdoms.
$394 “One day this clever horse died, and the news spread far and wide as people reported, ‘King Brahmadatta’s clever horse has died.’ As soon as the neighboring kings heard this, they all thought, ‘Whatever taxes he levied against us, he could levy only by the grace of this clever horse. Now when we see him coming, we can do as we please.’ They then waited for an opportunity to expose his vulnerabilities. King Brahmadatta heard the news that the neighboring kings were waiting to expose his vulnerabilities, [292.b] and as soon as he heard this he became afraid and could no longer leave the city.
$395 “Soon after, some merchants came to Vārāṇasī from the north with horses to sell. King Brahmadatta heard that merchants had arrived from the north with horses to sell, and straightaway he dispatched experts in the examination of horses. ‘Go and buy all the horses that are coming,’ he told them, ‘especially if there is a clever horse among them—be on the lookout for that.’
$396 King Brahmadatta’s attendants replied, ‘As you wish, Deva.’ They bought all the horses and examined them, and took the most clever horse among them to offer to the king. As soon as he heard this, the king was very pleased, and he presented the merchants with a great deal of gold and silver.
$397 “One day he mounted the clever horse and rode out to the gardens. When the neighboring kings heard that King Brahmadatta had ridden out to the gardens, they arrayed the four division of their armies and met in Vārāṇasī, where they surrounded the gardens. Desperate and not knowing what to do, King Brahmadatta thought, ‘Which way should I go?’ He thought, ‘I must drop everything, mount my clever horse, and leave the gardens,’ but when he looked out, he saw the gardens were surrounded by the armies of his opponents.
$398 “It was in the clever horse’s nature to save the king’s life. There was a ditch that separated the garden from the city—a very deep ditch, thick with lotus flowers. The clever horse thought, ‘There’s nowhere else to go,’ and stepped out onto the lotus petals to return to the city. When the neighboring kings saw this, they split open the clever horse’s belly with a sharp arrow shaped like a fishtail. [293.a]
“When the king saw this, he was terrified, and thought, ‘If this horse dies here in the middle of the water, I will surely be done for.’
$399 “The clever horse knew the king was terrified, and to reassure him, said in verse:
“ ‘Though you see my body Struck in battle by an arrow, Do not fear, my king, For I shall save you first before I die.’
$400 “With those words, the clever horse bore the king into the city, and, having protected the king, he died.
“O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was the clever horse then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was the king then is none other than Subhadra. At that time, stricken with acute pain at the moment of death I delivered him from fear and established him in a state of fearlessness. Now as well, stricken with acute pain at the moment of death I have delivered him from the dangers of saṃsāra and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$401 “Yet another time, stricken with acute pain at the moment of death, I delivered him from fear and protected him. Listen well!
“Monks, in times gone by, King Karṇa reigned in the city of Kanyakubja. The king was very fond of deer hunting, so one day he arrayed the four divisions of his army and set out on a hunt. On the banks of a certain river a herd of five hundred deer had stopped to rest, and the king had them surrounded by the four divisions of his army so that not a single deer could escape.
$402 “The deer that led the herd thought, ‘As the leader of the herd, I must think only of its welfare and happiness.’ He cast all about, wondering, ‘Which way should the deer go to escape?’ As he looked about, he saw a raging river, [293.b] and its riverbank was the only place that was not surrounded by the four divisions of the army. No one was on the riverbank.
$403 “The Bodhisattva thought, ‘The deer can neither ford nor leap across the river, so they will not be able to escape. I will plant my feet in the middle of the river, then, and stay there.’ He called out to the deer, ‘Clamber over me, all of you! Use my back to support your legs and cross to the other side of the river.’ The Bodhisattva planted his feet in the middle of the river and stood still.
$404 “Now bodhisattvas are strong and powerful, so the current did not move him, and as he stood there the deer all leapt onto his back, steadied their feet, and crossed to the other side of the river.
$405 “Their hooves cut up the Bodhisattva’s back, and when the last deer saw this he became apprehensive and thought ‘I’m certain I won’t make it across.’ Noting his apprehension, the Bodhisattva reassured him, ‘Don’t be scared, friend. You needn’t be worried you will die,’ and he saw the deer safely across. Once the deer had arrived on the other side, the Bodhisattva passed away.
$406 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who led the herd of deer then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the five hundred deer then are none other than the five hundred athletes of Kuśinagarī. The one who was the last deer to cross is none other than Subhadra. At that time, amid the pain of dying, I delivered him from danger and set him down in safety. And now as well, stricken with illness and near to death, I have delivered Subhadra and the five hundred athletes from all the dangers of saṃsāra and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.” [294.a]
$407 Then the Blessed One asked Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, did you see something?”
“Yes, Lord, I did.”
“What did you see?” the Blessed One asked.
“Lord, I saw that the Blessed One left an emanation here, then departed for the purpose of taming someone,” he replied.
$408 “O Ānanda, so it is,” the Blessed One replied. “It is just as you say, Ānanda. Only two persons remained for the Tathāgata to tame. Those were gandharva king Supriya and the mendicant Subhadra. Regarding them I thought, ‘I can easily tame the mendicant Subhadra, but the gandharva king Supriya is arrogant and aloof. So I will leave an emanation here and travel to the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, where I will establish the gandharva king Supriya in the truths before coming back.’ ”
$409 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did Supriya commit and accumulate that ripened into his birth among the gods as a gandharva king, and that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$410 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, the blessed one, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, an extraordinary teacher of music had come from the south to Vārāṇasī. Since he was a great teacher, King Kṛkī received him and awarded him a large salary, and since worldly people wish for wealth, he expanded the number of servants in his house. [294.b]
$411 “At that time in Vārāṇasī there also lived a certain lay vow holder who was a poor man. As he watched these wonderful things happen to the musician, a great desire for them arose in him. ‘It’s by the power of his previous deeds that such things happen to him,’ he thought. ‘Such deeds are good indeed!’ Having thought this, he went for refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and may I become a king among musicians. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$412 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that lay vow holder then is none other than the gandharva king Supriya. The act of going for refuge, maintaining the fundamental precepts all his life, and saying that prayer at the time of his death ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$413 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$414 The monks requested the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why, even amid the pain of dying, you took on such difficulties for the sake of taming someone.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, amid the pain of dying I took on great difficulties for the sake of taming someone. Listen well!
$415 “Monks, in times gone by, King Jaya (Victorious) reigned in the city of Undefeated Victory. One day the queen conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed [295.a] she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, ‘What name should we give this child?’ And they named him, saying, ‘Since this is the child of Jaya, his name will be Vijaya.’
$416 “Then they reared young Vijaya on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as the young man grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$417 “One day his father told him, ‘Son, your father’s country is wealthy and flourishing. Go now and see the whole of the land.’
“ ‘As you wish, father,’ he replied, and with those words the son traveled through the land with scores of attendants. After he had gone, King Jaya passed away, and his ministers sent a messenger to the prince that said, ‘Your father has passed away, so please return and safeguard your father’s kingdom.’
$418 “The prince was of a loving nature and quite compassionate, with a love for beings, so he immediately dispatched a messenger to the ministers that said, ‘There is only one way this is possible. If you set all of the beings in my father’s kingdom on the path of the ten virtuous actions, then I shall safeguard my father’s [295.b] country.’
“The ministers dispatched a messenger with a reply that said, ‘As you wish, master.’
$419 “They invited him and he assumed the mantle of the king, gave gifts, and made merit. To those who wished for food he gave food. To those who wished for something to drink he gave something to drink. To those who wished for clothes he gave clothes. To those who wished for adornments he gave adornments. To those who wished for mounts he gave mounts. To those who wished for other goods he gave other goods, and for the sick and for homes for the sick he provided everything that they needed, appointing healers and attendants.
$420 “He served the orphaned. He prepared a great deal of food and drink and made gifts of it to the creatures that flew through the sky, dwelt in the water, or made their homes in the fields. He set the worldly on the path of the ten virtuous actions, and thereafter, their embrace of the path of the ten virtuous actions was cause for the greater part of those beings to take birth among the gods, until they began to fill all the gods’ residences.
$421 “Then Śakra, king of the gods, thought, ‘There are only two reasons for all the gods’ residences to fill up—the appearance of the Tathāgata, or the appearance of a universal monarch. Has the Tathāgata appeared in the world, or has a universal monarch appeared in the world?’ But when he looked, he saw that neither had the Tathāgata appeared in the world, nor had a universal monarch appeared. ‘Well then, because of whom have the gods’ residences become full?’ he wondered.
$422 “Śakra, King of the Gods, looked, and saw that it was because of King Vijaya. He thought, ‘What is he trying to do there?’ and when he looked again he saw that he was practicing to attain unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Then Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, ‘I will go for a time [296.a] and see for myself whether he is of firm resolve. If this being’s resolve is firm, I shall worship him. If this being’s resolve is not firm, I shall steady him.’ With this in mind, Śakra, King of the Gods, emanated himself in the region as a variety of beings, and the emanations said to the ministers, ‘If the king satisfies us with food and drink, afterward we too will adopt the path of the ten virtuous actions and abide by it.’
$423 “The ministers made the request of King Vijaya, and King Vijaya summoned the emanations and told them, ‘I shall satisfy you with food and drink.’ The emanations replied, ‘Deva, you will not be able to satisfy us with food and drink, for we eat the flesh of humans freshly killed, and drink their blood.’
“The king thought, ‘These are nonhuman spirits! Flesh and blood like that can’t be had without killing someone. Well then, if they are going to adopt the path of the ten virtuous actions and abide by it, I will satisfy them with my own flesh and blood.’
$424 “The Bodhisattva said to the emanations, ‘If you completely adopt the path of the ten virtuous actions and abide by it, I shall satisfy you with my own flesh and blood.’
“ ‘As you wish,’ replied the emanations.
$425 “The Bodhisattva immediately began carving the flesh out from all over his body and handing it to them, all the while praying for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, ‘By this root of virtue, may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without any guide at all, without anyone to show them the way—an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, a sugata, [296.b] a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a Blessed Buddha.’
$426 “After praying for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, he set the emanations on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, ‘Though this bodhisattva has performed an extraordinary austerity, I cannot restore his body. Still, I must spur him on.’ With this thought, he said to the Bodhisattva, ‘My friend, are you not even a little unhappy to cut away your flesh and sever your sinews and veins?’
“The Bodhisattva replied, ‘Oh, I’m not the least bit unhappy to cut away my flesh or to sever my sinews and veins. As I witness my own distress, I feel especially strong compassion for beings born as hell beings, animals, or anguished spirits.’
$427 “ ‘How could I possibly believe you, my friend?’ asked Śakra.
“ ‘You will rejoice at my invocation of the truth,’ the Bodhisattva said. With that the Bodhisattva began to invoke the truth, saying, ‘If it is true that I’m not the least bit unhappy to cut away my flesh and to sever my sinews and veins, then by these words of truth may my body be restored.’ No sooner had the Bodhisattva said this than his body was restored.
$428 “Śakra, King of the Gods, assumed his natural form, bowed down at the feet of the Bodhisattva, and asked his forgiveness. ‘My friend,’ he said, ‘forgive me for harming you with such ill intent, for though I had intended this to spur you on, in the end I only hurt you.’ With that, Śakra, King of the Gods, [297.a] disappeared on the spot.
$429 “O monks, what do you think? I was the one who was that bodhisattva then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. There as well, amid the pain of dying I took on great difficulties for the sake of taming someone.”
The Worthy of Offerings Litany
$430 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī there lived a certain householder. When the time came for him to marry, he took a wife and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. In time he found faith in the Buddha, faith in the Dharma, and faith in the Saṅgha, went for refuge, took the fundamental precepts, and began to give gifts and make merit. The householder became like an open well, and the monks who were assigned to his house on behalf of the saṅgha took their food there every day.
$431 One day the householder extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks and contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. Once he knew that the Blessed One had finished eating and that his bowl had been taken away and his hands washed, the householder brought in a very low seat and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$432 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, the householder destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat. After the Blessed One had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a discourse on the Dharma he rose from his seat [297.b] and departed.
$433 One day it was the turn of a monk who had newly become an arhat to take his meal there on behalf of the assembly. He came accompanied by a non-returner affiliated with the monastery.
$434 After the householder had provided food for both of them, Venerable Śāriputra thought, “That monk doesn’t know how to recite the Worthy of Offerings litany#173 for the householder.” So Venerable Śāriputra went to the house himself and sat down upon the seat that had been prepared. The monks said to him, “Elder brother, we request that you please chant the Worthy of Offerings litany.”
$435 Venerable Śāriputra observed that the assembly was indeed worthy of offerings, so he recited the Worthy of Offerings litany accordingly and said, “I myself cannot tell you the karmic ripening of the fruits of each portion given. The Blessed One is omniscient. He understands an action’s ripening and result.”
$436 After he recited the Worthy of Offerings litany, he also taught the householder and his wife the Dharma particularly suited to them, such that the householder and his wife manifested the resultant state of non-return. After Venerable Śāriputra had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted them with a discourse on the Dharma, he rose from his seat and departed.
$437 One day the householder thought, “I have had enough of living at home. I will go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.” Both spouses gave gifts and made merit, and went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One. Once gone forth, they cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, [298.a] superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$438 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “what action did this married couple take that ripened into their births into families of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that they pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him; that they went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$439 “Lord, where did they make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, they went forth in his teaching.
$440 “They gave gifts, made merit, and practiced pure conduct all their lives. Then at the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever we are born, may it be into families of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’ [298.b]
$441 “O monks, what do you think? Those who were the two married persons then and went forth in the teaching of Buddha Kāśyapa are none other than these two married persons who have gone forth now. The acts of going forth, giving gifts and making merit, practicing pure conduct all their lives, and saying that prayer at the time of their deaths ripened such that wherever they were born, it was into families of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that they pleased me and did not displease me, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
Latecomers to the Dharma: Two Stories
The First “Latecomer” Story
$442 When the Blessed One was in the garden of Prince Jeta in Śrāvastī, Anāthapiṇḍada commissioned the construction of a monastery complete in every respect. He offered it to the Blessed One and the rest of saṅgha of monks, and began to give gifts and make merit.
$443 At that time there was another householder in Śrāvastī who thought, “How can I outshine the householder Anāthapiṇḍada in gift giving?” Then he thought, “Aha! If I venture out onto the great ocean to Ratnadvīpa and complete my voyage, upon my return I shall be able to outshine the householder Anāthapiṇḍada’s gift giving.”
$444 So he ventured out onto the great ocean to Ratnadvīpa, completed his voyage, and returned to Śrāvastī. Upon his return he began to give gifts and make merit, but he was still unable to outshine the householder Anāthapiṇḍada.
One day the householder [299.a] asked Venerable Śāriputra, “Lord Śāriputra, by what means can my virtue outshine Anāthapiṇḍada’s gift giving?”
$445 “Householder, Anāthapiṇḍada’s merit is of great renown,” Venerable Śāriputra told him. “He can see treasures, whether they belong to someone or to no one, or whether they are in the water or on dry land, near or far. That’s why you can’t outshine him in giving. You could only outshine him by going forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.”
$446 No sooner had the householder heard this than he gave gifts, made merit, and went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One. Having gone forth, he cast away all afflictive emotions with diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$447 The householder Anāthapiṇḍada heard that such-and-such a householder had gone forth in the doctrine of the Buddha to outshine him, and that after going forth he had cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship. When he heard this, the householder Anāthapiṇḍada surged with joy. He went to see the monk, bowed down at his feet, and said, “By going forth you have outshone me. [299.b] For as long as I live, I shall serve you with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, a seat, and medicines for the sick—whatever you need.”
$448 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why this householder wanting to outshine the householder Anāthapiṇḍada in giving, but, unable to do so, instead outshone him by going forth, and why he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$449 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, this householder decided to outshine the householder Āṣāḍha in giving, but, being unable to do so, he outshone him by going forth. He practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘I have practiced pure conduct in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa all my life, given gifts, and made merit. By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$450 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that householder then is none other than this monk. At that time too he wanted to outshine the householder [300.a] Āṣāḍha in giving and was unable to outshine him. Only by going forth was he able to do so. Now as well he thought to outshine the householder Anāthapiṇḍada in giving and was unable to outshine him, but by going forth he was able to do so.
$451 “At that time he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’ ”
$452 “Lord,” the monks further asked of the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why this monk, intent on vast deeds, sought to outshine others and sought not to be outshone by others himself.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, intent on vast deeds, he wished to outshine others, and sought not to be outshone by others himself.
$453 “Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as thirty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kanakamuni was in the world, [300.b] he totally and completely awakened unto unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment and then traveled to the royal palace called Śobhāvatī.
$454 “On his behalf, King Śobha started building a monastery in his own gardens. He called together his sons and ministers, the different divisions of army, the townspeople, those from the surrounding countryside, and a great mass of others, and told them, ‘Let those among you who can generate a great deal of wealth build this monastery!’
$455 “At that time there was a certain householder who began generating even greater wealth than the king. He generated wealth until he had nine billion pieces of gold, and then he could not generate any more. ‘As a duly consecrated king,’ he thought, ‘King Śobha will be embarrassed by this.’ Thinking this, he gave up generating any more wealth.
$456 “When King Śobha had completed the monastery in every respect, he offered it to the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kanakamuni and his saṅgha of disciples, and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, may I please and not displease a teacher just like this one. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$457 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that householder then is none other than this householder. At that time too, intent on vast deeds, he sought to outshine others, and sought not to be outshone by others himself. Now as well, intent on vast deeds, he sought to outshine others, and sought not to be outshone by others himself.” [301.a]
The Second “Latecomer” Story
$458 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, as the foolish people of Videha were massacring the Śākyas, there lived in Kapilavastu two sons of Venerable Ānanda’s sister whose parents had been taken from them, and who were orphaned and drifting about Kapilavastu.
$459 During that time there was a certain householder of Śrāvastī who was a friend of the boys’ father and had come to Kapilavastu to do some work. When he saw the two boys, he immediately recognized them and asked, “Boys, where are your parents?”
$460 “The people of Videha killed them,” they said. “They have been taken from us. Now we are orphaned and drifting here and there.”
“If there are no relatives to look after you, you should go to Śrāvastī,” advised the householder. “Lord Ānanda is your uncle, and he loves his relatives. He will look after the two of you.”
$461 “We don’t know the way to the garden of Prince Jeta,” said the two boys. “How do we get there?”
“Boys, come with me,” the householder said. “I have to go to Kapilavastu on an errand. When I’m done, I’ll bring you to the garden of Prince Jeta.” Having spoken thus, the householder departed.
$462 After he finished his work in Kapilavastu, the householder led the boys to Śrāvastī. He brought them before the gate of the garden of Prince Jeta and told them, “Your uncle lives here in a hermitage. He will look after you,” and departed.
$463 After he had gone, the boys walked in through a door and began to make themselves at home, but Ānanda did not recognize them and asked, “Who are you boys? Where did you come from?”
They replied, “We are the sons of such-and-such a Śākya in Kapilavastu.”
$464 “Where have your parents gone?” asked Ānanda.
“The people of Videha killed them,” the boys replied. “We were left behind as orphans, with no one to look after us, so the two of us have been drifting here and there. [301.b] We heard that our uncle was in the garden of Prince Jeta, so we came here to see him.”
$465 Hearing this, Venerable Ānanda became despondent and thought, “What should I do?”
The monks saw him and asked, “Lord Ānanda, why are you so despondent?”
“These two boys are my sister’s sons,” Ānanda responded. “They came here because they lost their parents, and I am despondent to see them so. But how can I look after these two? For as the Buddha has said, ‘One should not misuse the donations of the faithful.’ ”
$466 The monks said, “Did the Blessed One not also state, ‘You should be helpful and generous’? These two could look after the alms bowls for us and help with the flowers and fruit.”
$467 After that, Venerable Ānanda took in the two boys and looked after them. The monks also came bearing a little food and gave it to the two of them. Venerable Ānanda also gave them half of whatever alms he received, and himself ate only what was left, such that he became frail, gaunt, and emaciated and lost all his strength.
$468 The Blessed One observed that Venerable Ānanda had become frail, gaunt, and emaciated and had lost all his strength. Seeing this, the Blessed One asked the monks, “Monks, why has the monk Ānanda become frail, gaunt, and emaciated and lost all his strength?”
$469 “Lord,” the monks replied to the Blessed One, “Venerable Ānanda has taken in his sister’s sons. He gives them half of whatever alms he receives, and himself eats only what is left. Lord, that is the cause, and those are the conditions, for Venerable Ānanda’s becoming frail, gaunt, and emaciated and losing all his strength.”
$470 Then the Blessed One [302.a] asked Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, are these two boys to go forth?”
“They will go forth,” was his reply.
$471 The Blessed One declared to the monks, “Monks, I shall permit food belonging to the saṅgha to be given to those who are to go forth. There are different types of work they can do starting out, such as looking after the alms bowls, or offering flowers, fruits, and tooth-sticks.”
$472 Once the Blessed One had given permission for the boys to partake of the food belonging to the saṅgha and they had finished eating it, they began to sit and play. So the Blessed One asked Venerable Ānanda, “You said that these two boys would go forth, Ānanda, so why have they not gone forth?”
“Blessed One, they will go forth,” he replied.
$473 The Blessed One asked, “Well then, what has become of their going forth?”
“The Blessed One has said that a person should neither go forth as a novice nor receive full ordination before the age of fifteen years,” he replied. “How then are we to lead these two to go forth if they are hardly seven years of age?”
$474 “Ānanda,” the Blessed One replied, “are they able to chase away crows from the food set out for the saṅgha?”
“Yes, Blessed One, they can do that.”
“If that is the case,” the Blessed One replied, “then they may go forth at the age of seven if they are able to chase away a crow. The Blessed One will similarly permit the going forth of others who are both seven years of age and able to chase away a crow.”
$475 So Venerable Ānanda led the two boys to go forth as novices and had them learn recitation. After that, because he considered them family, loved them, and took pride in them, he was not able to teach them, and they passed their days in gossip and their nights in sloth and slumber.
$476 When Venerable Maudgalyāyana saw them, he asked Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, why aren’t you teaching these two boys?”
“Lord Mahā­maudgalyāyana,” Ānanda replied, “because they consider me an equal,#174 [302.b] and I am overcome with affection for them, I can’t keep them in line.”
$477 “Ānanda, if you are overcome with affection for them and can’t teach them, then place them with another monk.”
“Lord Mahā­maudgalyāyana, who could set aside their own virtuous work to train these two?”
$478 “Ask one of your friends,” he replied.
“You are my friend, Lord,” said Ānanda.
So Venerable Ānanda took the boys by the hand and presented them to Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, saying, “Boys, you two cannot study with me. Study with Lord Mahā­maudgalyāyana.”
$479 The two boys thought, “This monk is no softie, that’s for sure. That’s why he handed us over to him.” Bearing this in mind they were diligent in their studies. But when they happily discovered that Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana was also gentle and friendly, the two began to consider him an equal as well, and could not learn from him.
$480 Venerable Ānanda asked, “Lord Mahā­maudgalyāyana, why is it you aren’t teaching these two?”
“Venerable Ānanda, they consider me an equal as well,” he replied, “so I can’t teach them.”
$481 “Then fill them with weariness for saṃsāra. If you don’t, they won’t be able to learn,” said Venerable Ānanda.
“As you wish, Venerable Ānanda,” he said.
$482 Maudgalyāyana took the boys on a walk and along the way emanated hell beings so the boys would feel disenchanted with saṃsāra. The two boys heard very menacing sounds not far from where they were walking and went to Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana. Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana asked them, “Boys, what is that sound?”
“Master, we’re not entirely sure what that sound is,” they said.
$483 Mahā­maudgalyāyana told them, “You two go and see where those noises are coming from.” [303.a]
They did as Venerable Maudgalyāyana instructed and walked in the direction of the noise. When they neared the sounds, they saw the sufferings the hell beings endured—being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on—and asked them, “Who are you?”
“We are hell beings,” replied the emanations.
$484 Then the two noticed a great boiling iron cauldron with nothing being cooked in it and asked, “Why is this iron cauldron boiling here for no reason?”
“It isn’t boiling here for no reason,” the emanations said. “Ānanda’s sister’s two sons went forth and began to enjoy the food donated to the saṅgha, but now they’ve become lazy, and when they die they will take rebirth here. This cauldron sits and boils for those two.”
$485 When they heard this the boys flushed with terror and fled to Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana. When he saw them, Mahā­maudgalyāyana asked, “Boys, where were those noises coming from?”
The two boys related everything in detail to Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana and he advised them, “Boys, if I had told you this, you would not have believed me. Now that both of you have seen it with your own eyes, don’t let yourselves take rebirth as hell beings.”
$486 After they heard this the boys immediately became diligent in their studies. When they remembered the suffering of the hell beings in the morning, they would push their food away. When they remembered it in the afternoon, they would vomit up their food. This caused them both to become frail, gaunt, and emaciated and lose all their strength.
$487 When Venerable Ānanda saw them he asked Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, “Lord Mahā­maudgalyāyana, [303.b] why have these two become so frail, gaunt, and emaciated and lost all their strength?” Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana explained everything to him in detail.
$488 Venerable Ānanda said to him, “Their despair is overwhelming—they are going to get sick. You have to cheer them up.”
“As you wish,” Mahā­maudgalyāyana replied.
$489 So Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana told the two boys, “Take up your mats. Let’s go for a walk.”
The two of them said, “That’s enough walking for us, noble one. We’ll just stay right here and study.”
$490 “We’re not going back to that place on our walk, boys,” Mahā­maudgalyāyana assured them.
“We’re going somewhere else.” And he took the boys on a walk to another place.
$491 To cheer them up, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana emanated a god realm not far from the place where they were having their walk. In that heaven there was a young god decorated with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones and surrounded by young goddesses. They began playing music and enjoying themselves and coupling.
$492 The boys heard the sounds of music not far from the place where they were walking and went to Venerable Maudgalyāyana. When Venerable Maudgalyāyana saw them, he asked, “Boys, what is that sound?”
“Master, we’re not entirely sure what that sound is,” they replied.
$493 Maudgalyāyana told them, “You two go and see where that sound is coming from.”
They did as Venerable Maudgalyāyana had instructed and walked in the direction of the sound. Upon their arrival, they looked around and saw a young god decorated with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones and surrounded by young goddesses, all playing music, enjoying themselves, and coupling.
$494 When the boys saw them they asked, “Who are you?”
“We are gods,” said the emanations. [304.a]
They noticed two lion thrones surrounded by a great number of goddesses, but no young gods sat upon them. They were amazed by this sight, and asked, “How could these lion thrones be empty, with no young gods seated upon them?”
$495 The emanations said, “Ānanda’s sister’s two sons went forth and have now begun exerting themselves. When they die and transmigrate, they will take rebirth here, and we will enjoy ourselves with them, coupling on these lion thrones.”
$496 Seeing this, the boys experienced a surge of happiness. “Our efforts will bring great results! Not only are we free from rebirth as hell beings, but now we shall achieve rebirth as gods.” In their happiness they returned to Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana. When he saw them Mahā­maudgalyāyana asked, “Boys, where was that sound coming from?”
$497 The two boys related everything in detail to Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, whereupon Maudgalyāyana advised them, “Boys, if I had told you this, you would not have believed me. Now that both of you have seen it with your own eyes, you must be particularly diligent.”
Upon hearing this, the boys immediately began to study with extra diligence again.
$498 Then one day they heard the discourse on the Wheel-like Compendium and thought, “Since we’ve been circling in saṃsāra over and over again like buckets on a waterwheel—as hell beings, animals, anguished spirits, gods, and humans—there’s no need for us to take rebirth as gods, nor is there any need for us to take rebirth as humans. Let us put our efforts into achieving non-existence.”
$499 Venerable [304.b] Mahā­maudgalyāyana, knowing their disillusionment, conferred on them instructions to be pondered, and they cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$500 After achieving arhatship, using emanations, they traveled from one place to another, picking up flowers and fruits that were out of season to make offerings to the saṅgha. Their fellow practitioners of the holy life thought, “These two are very powerful.” Seeing them, they developed weariness for saṃsāra and thought, “If they can achieve such great virtues as these at seven years of age, why have we not achieved the same, when the color of our hair has already gone from black to grey to white?” In weariness for saṃsāra they cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.
$501 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “what actions did these two novices take that ripened into their going forth at just seven years of age, casting away all afflictive emotions, and manifesting arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers.”
$502 “Lord, where did they make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with insight and [305.a] perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, one day he traveled through Kāśi attended by a large saṅgha of monks, and arrived in Vārāṇasī.
$503 “At that time a group of some five hundred friends walked into the gardens, playing drums, enjoying themselves, and coupling. The group of friends saw the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa from a distance and thought, ‘Now that the world is adorned with the presence of a buddha, Jambudvīpa will fill up with arhats. We have dwelt at home long enough. We should go forth into the doctrine of the Buddha.’
$504 “Some replied, ‘We should indulge our cravings while our bodies are still young. We’ll go forth later on, when we’re old. We’ll get there.’ Having said this, they did not go forth.
$505 “Some among them bore children. Others died. One day some of them realized, ‘There are others who can carry out the affairs of the house now. Let us then go and go forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.’
“Some others said to them, ‘Right now we have to build houses for our children and give our daughters away in marriage,’ and they did not go forth at that time either.
$506 “One day, after almost all of them had died, only two remained. Then those two began to feel disillusioned about saṃsāra and thought, ‘Back when we were twenty-five and young, we all felt a sense of faith and had a chance to go forth, but we did not do it. Now everyone has died, and only the two of us remain. We’ve become elderly and infirm, and we’ll probably [305.b] die soon. We have dwelt at home long enough. We should go forth into the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.’ Having thought this, they gave gifts and made merit, and went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.
$507 “The Blessed One has said that beginner monks should serve and respect the saṅgha, so they stayed and served the saṅgha. As they did, others began referring to them as ‘latecomers.’ This made one of them very unhappy. The other, who was very patient, told him, ‘Lord, they’re not to blame. We’re to blame. Let your mind not be filled with hatred toward these monks. It’s not their fault. It’s our fault. If the two of us had gone forth when we were young, they wouldn’t be calling us latecomers. They refer to us as latecomers because the two of us went forth after we were already old.’
$508 “After his explanation, the other understood and fell silent. Then they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘While we may not have attained any great virtues, still we have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all our lives. Therefore may we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Even should he declare as a fundamental precept that those who are too young may not go forth, may we two be instrumental in [306.a] his granting permission to do so.’
$509 “O monks, what do you think? Those who were the latecomers then and went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa are none other than these two novices. At that time they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths they prayed thus.
$510 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, manifested arhatship, and that they have become instrumental in my permitting those who are seven years of age and able to chase away a crow to go forth.”
$511 This concludes Part Six of The Hundred Deeds.
$512 1. The Story of Paṅgu 2. Bhādra 3. The Blind Man 4. The Story of Nirgrantha Kāśyapa 5. The Story of Foremost Kāśyapa 6. The Story of Mounted on an Elephant 7. The Story of Saraṇa 8. The Mṛgavratins 9. The Story of Candrā 10. The Kinnara Spirits: Two Stories
The Story of Paṅgu
$513 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain householder who, when the time came for him to marry, took a wife. As they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed she gave birth to a child. The upper part of the child’s body was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, but the limbs of his lower body were incomplete.
$514 No sooner had the child been born than the household began to succeed in all its endeavors. Its merchants traveling by land accomplished their aims, their merchants traveling by sea on great seafaring vessels accomplished their aims, and all of them safely returned. Their cattle and buffalo herds also thrived.
$515 Since everything they did was successful, the householder thought, “It’s all on account of our child that every one of our endeavors [306.b] is successful. This child of mine who was born without feeling in his limbs has glorious qualities.” At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since this child is one who moves about by crawling, his name will also be Paṅgu.” They reared young Paṅgu on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids.
$516 The more he grew, the more the wealth of the household increased as well. Soon people began to say, “Because of him, whatever endeavors they undertake are successful. What glorious qualities this child has!” As soon as they heard this, the many inhabitants of Śrāvastī started to go see him from time to time. Afterward they undertook whatever aims they wished to accomplish in the name of the child, and they were successful. So it was that he became famous throughout Śrāvastī.
$517 When he grew up, his father made a jeweled palanquin for him to ride in. At home, they made him learn letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$518 One day, as he was riding in the palanquin accompanied by a great throng, he entered the grounds of the garden. When he looked out from the palanquin, he saw a large crowd—group after group and elder after elder—convening in the garden of Prince Jeta. Seeing them, he asked in amazement, “Where is this great crowd headed?”
“We’re going to see the Blessed One,” they [307.a] replied.
$519 “What is this ‘Blessed One’?” the lame young man asked.
“At the foot of the Himalayas, not far from the hermitage of the sage Kapila, a child was born to the Śākyas,” they explained. “The brahmin sign tellers and augurs predicted, ‘If he remains here at home, he will become a universal monarch, but if he shaves his head and face and dons the colorful religious robes, and if with nothing short of perfect faith he goes forth from home to live as a mendicant, then he will be renowned throughout the world as a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha.’ ”
$520 As soon as the young brahmin heard this, he was eager to meet the Blessed One. Accompanied by the great crowd he went to the garden of Prince Jeta, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds.
$521 Young Paṅgu saw the Blessed One from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When he saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled him with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$522 After seeing him he descended from the palanquin in reverence toward the Buddha, crawled on four limbs before the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. [307.b] The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, Paṅgu destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$523 Having seen the truths, he thought, “If my body weren’t like this, I too would go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, to ford the floodwaters and completely escape my fetters with diligence, practice, and effort.” No sooner had he thought this than the limbs of his body were made whole. As he rejoiced, he was especially filled with joy toward the Blessed One.
$524 In his joy he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, and asked the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$525 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. [308.a] He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$526 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “what action did Paṅgu take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth? What action did he take that ripened into his becoming a paraplegic; that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him; that as soon as he felt a sense of renunciation, his misfortune vanished and he became fortunate instead; and that he went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$527 “Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there lived a certain lay vow holder in Vārāṇasī who was a very learned proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of wisdom and freedom. All the other lay vow holders held him in high esteem, and revered, honored, and venerated him.
$528 “The totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa had taken up residence in Vārāṇasī, and while he was there many lay vow holders came before him to listen to the Dharma. Whenever the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa traveled from their region to another place, [308.b] the other lay vow holders would go to listen to the Dharma from that certain lay vow holder in Vārāṇasī. All the other lay vow holders would make a gift of five hundred gold coins to that lay vow holder. Those lay vow holders would also offer five hundred gold coins to the saṅgha.
$529 “One day that lay vow holder went to the monastery with the group of other lay vow holders. The entire saṅgha of monks was performing a monastic ritual, so the caretaker of the monastery sent all the lay vow holders away from the monastery and told them they weren’t allowed to listen.
$530 “The group of lay vow holders said, ‘The monks can send us away like that, but why should they send away a learned proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of wisdom and freedom, such as you? None among them is as erudite as you are.’
$531 “This angered the lay vow holder and he shouted at the monks, ‘You all perch on your thrones as if you were disabled! Everything I earn I give to you, and now you’ve disgraced me in public without so much as a word to me personally!’
$532 “The monks thought, ‘This emotionally afflicted person has become quite abased,’ and they said to the lay vow holder, ‘You must confess the mistake you’ve made by speaking harshly to us. Otherwise your actions are sure to bring an ugly result.’
$533 “The lay vow holder was flooded with regret. He said, ‘It was wrong for me to speak harshly to ones so worthy of offerings.’ He confessed his mistake, gave gifts and made merit, went for refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life.
$534 “At the time of his death, he prayed, ‘Oh, in this way may I not meet with the results of the wrongful act of speaking harshly [309.a] to such pure beings. Should the results of that action ripen to me, then as soon as I feel a sense of renunciation, may that misfortune vanish and may I be fortunate instead. May I serve the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha, give gifts and make merit, go for refuge, and maintain the fundamental precepts all my life. By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May my name be auspicious the world over. May all my intentions and all my wishes be successfully fulfilled.’
$535 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that lay vow holder then is none other than Paṅgu. The act of speaking harshly to the monks ripened such that for five hundred lives he was a paraplegic. The acts of giving gifts and making merit, taking refuge, maintaining the fundamental precepts all his life, and praying at the time of his death ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that his name became auspicious the world over; that he pleased me, and did not displease me; that as soon as he felt a sense of renunciation, his misfortune vanished and he became fortunate instead; and that he went forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.” [1.b]
Bhādra
$536 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, deep in a certain forest there lived some five hundred sages who had settled down there to perform ritual fire pūjās.
$537 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night. [2.a]
$538 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$539 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$540 The Blessed One thought, “The time has come to tame these five hundred sages,” whereupon the Blessed One performed a miracle that caused all five hundred sages to see evidence of the Buddha’s footprints all over the inside of the hearths they used for their ritual fire pūjās. Then they found they could not kindle their fires anymore, and they thought, “It’s by the might of these footprints that we can’t kindle a fire in these hearths. [2.b] It seems that these footprints must somehow be auspicious—are these the footprints of Mahā­deva ?”
$541 All five hundred sages offered those things intended for the sacrificial fire to the footprints of the Buddha, and by the power of the Buddha the offerings burst into flames that reached all the way up to Brahmāloka. The sages were amazed at the sight, and they thought, “ Mahā­deva thinks of us.”
$542 To guide them, the Blessed One then performed a miracle that caused the footprints to lead, one after another, into the garden of Prince Jeta. The sages saw the emanated footprints, one after another, leading away from their ritual fire pūjās, and thought, “ Mahā­deva went this way!” They followed one footprint after another, making offerings as they went, until eventually they entered the garden of Prince Jeta, where the Blessed One was teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds.
$543 The five hundred sages saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When they saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled them with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$544 After they saw him they approached the Blessed One, touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, [3.a] and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. When they heard it they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where they sat.
$545 After seeing the truths they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$546 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$547 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why, by showing the sages the footprints, the Blessed One led them to go forth and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, with footprints I led these five hundred sages to go forth, [3.b] whereupon they practiced pure conduct all their lives. Listen well!
$548 “Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa put on a great display of miracles. Out of compassion for people in times to come, and so that he might lead the five hundred sages, he performed a miracle that caused them to take the appearance of the Buddha’s footprints as a sign.
$549 “At that time in the south, there were some five hundred sages living in a certain forest for practicing austerities. As they traveled through the heavens above the footprints of the Blessed Buddha to Gandhamādana Mountain, they were amazed to find themselves unable to go any farther, as if obstructed by Mount Sumeru itself. ‘Our miraculous powers have not waned,’ they thought. ‘How can it be we are obstructed in the sky?’
$550 “A god who was fond of them explained, ‘Though your miraculous powers have not waned, far below you are footprints of the Buddha. Beyond them even Śakra and Brahmā cannot pass.’ The sages took great delight in the footprints. In their joy they descended to the earth and began to venerate the footprints. To lead them, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa performed a miracle that caused the footprints to float up one by one to where the sages were hovering, and the sages thought, ‘These footprints belong to Mahā­deva . He went this way!’ Thinking this, the sages began following the footprints, and then all five hundred sages saw the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa from a distance. [4.a]
$551 “At the sight of him, they experienced a surge of joy toward the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. In their joy they approached the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward him with palms pressed together, and requested, ‘Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.’
$552 “After the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them, they practiced pure conduct all their lives. Though they did not achieve any great virtues, at the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘While we may not have attained any great virtues, still we have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all our lives. Therefore, may we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$553 “O monks, what do you think? Those five hundred sages then are none other than these five hundred sages now. At that time they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. [4.b] May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$554 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Blind Man
$555 When the Blessed One was in Mahā­deva Mango Grove in Mithilā, there lived in Mithilā a certain householder named Variegated. He was prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s.
$556 When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. As they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was deformed and blind. When the householders saw their child, both parents were devastated. “It is a rare thing to give birth to a son, but one who turns out like this, deformed and blind, is of no use to us,” they said. “When night falls, we’ll toss him out to the dogs.” So his parents brought him outside, set him down on the main road, and left him for the dogs.
$557 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, [5.a] absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$558 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$559 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$560 The Blessed One thought, “The time has come for me to make a revelation about this child. He will be instrumental in guiding a great many disciples.” With this in mind, the Blessed One performed a miracle that prevented the child from being eaten by dogs, come what may. Early in the morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he set out for Mithilā surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks, until he arrived not far from where the young man was. [5.b]
$561 Many of the inhabitants of Mithilā saw the Blessed Buddha and they were filled with wonder. Impelled by their previous roots of virtue they went to see the Blessed One, and when they arrived before him, the Blessed One thought, “The best thing would be for me to enter into a meditation such that this child remembers his former lives and can converse with me in words.”
$562 So the Blessed One entered into a meditation such that the child remembered his former lives and could converse with him. Then the Blessed One asked him, “Child, are you an ugly person?”
“O Blessed One, I am an ugly person.”
$563 “Child, are you an ugly person?”
“Sugata, I am an ugly person.”
$564 The Blessed One then asked, “Are you now undergoing the hideous repercussions of your misconduct of body, speech, and mind?”
“Blessed One, I am indeed undergoing the hideous repercussions of my misconduct of body, speech, and mind,” he replied.
$565 The Blessed One continued, “Who guided you to such nonvirtue?”
“My own mind,” he replied.
$566 Hearing this, immediately the people gathered there wondered, “Who is this being who remembers his former lives and converses with the Blessed One?” The ears of the blessed buddhas are difficult to reach, and they were not able to put their question to the Blessed One. So they inquired of Venerable Ānanda, “Lord Ānanda, who is this being who recalls his former lives and converses with the Blessed One?”
$567 “Put your question to the Blessed One,” Venerable Ānanda replied.
“The ears of the blessed buddhas are difficult to reach,” [6.a] they said, “and their presence is overwhelming. We cannot ask the Blessed Buddha ourselves.”
Ānanda said, “Though the ears of the blessed buddhas are difficult to reach for me as well, out of compassion for you I shall ask.”
$568 Venerable Ānanda drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, who is this being who remembers his former lives and converses with the Blessed One?”
“Ānanda,” the Blessed One explained, “this being is one who committed nonvirtuous actions over and over again. The nonvirtuous actions he committed were manifold.
$569 “Ānanda, in times gone by, a certain king lived in Mithilā whose name was Virūpa . That king developed into a jealous person. When he was surrounded by his retinue of queens and wished to go somewhere—into the gardens or some other place—he cleared all the people off the road, even going so far as to cover their windows and doors with thick curtains. Should someone catch a glimpse of his retinue of queens, he would pluck out that person’s eyes. He rendered many beings blind in this way. One day, he entered the gardens attended by his retinue of queens.
$570 “In times when a blessed one has not arisen in the world, in compassion for the destitute and suffering the solitary buddhas appear, taking up residence in remote places. Solitary as the rhinoceros, in all the world they alone are worthy of offerings. So it was that a solitary buddha was coming down the road. Without attracting the attention of the king’s attendants he stood before the retinue of queens. When the women noticed the elegance of his body and the elegance of his mind, they were filled with joy. In their joy they opened their veils, [6.b] bowed down, and paid homage to him.
$571 “As soon as the king heard about this, he bristled with fury on account of his jealousy. In anger he ordered his royal attendants, “All of you, go pluck out that renunciant’s eyes!” As soon as his royal attendants heard this, they seized the solitary buddha and plucked out both his eyes. Faced as he was with this manifestation of his previous deeds, the solitary buddha did not think to so much as disguise himself, much less emanate.
$572 “Then the solitary buddha thought, ‘It’s not right for this emotionally afflicted person, who has become so abased, to circle in saṃsāra and meet with great suffering.’ Reflecting in this way, he thought, ‘I have to help him.’ He rose up into the sky, making a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning.
$573 “Ordinary people are quickly brought to faith through miracles. When the king saw all this, he bowed down at the solitary buddha’s feet like a tree felled by a saw and said, ‘Oh great fortunate one, please, please come down! I’m mired in misdeeds! Please reach down and lift me up!’
$574 “Because he had sustained such injuries, however, the great being passed into parinirvāṇa. The king venerated his relics and prayed, ‘In this way may I not experience the results of the act of causing such a pure being to undergo such agony. By the root of virtue of having paid homage to him, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$575 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was King Virūpa then [7.a] is none other than this blind man. The act of plucking out the solitary buddha’s eyes and rendering hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of beings sightless ripened such that for hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of years he was always blind, and was roasted by hell beings.
$576 “After dying and transmigrating from there, he took rebirth as an anguished spirit for five hundred lifetimes. This also caused him to undergo great suffering, and he was always blind.
“After dying as an anguished spirit and transmigrating, he took rebirth as an animal for five hundred lifetimes, where he was also always blind.
“When he died as an animal, he transmigrated and took rebirth as a human being for five hundred lifetimes, and in every birth he was blind.”
$577 “Lord,” the monks inquired, “when will this being be liberated from his suffering?”
“Monks” the Blessed One replied, “in the future a totally and completely awakened buddha named Sumati , who will far surpass the listeners and the solitary buddhas, will emerge in the world. It is through his teaching that this being will obtain a human birth with all his faculties intact. Then he will go forth in Buddha Sumati ’s teaching, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.
$578 “Even after he has achieved arhatship, one day while he is sleeping crows will appear due to his past actions and pluck out both his eyes. After sustaining such injuries he will pass into parinirvāṇa. It is then that he will be liberated from his past actions.”
As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief, and they thought, “By the force of the afflictive emotions, spiraling through saṃsāra we are sure to meet with sufferings such as these.”
$579 The Blessed One directly apprehended their grief, taught them the Dharma accordingly and among the assembled some generated heat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, [7.b] or generated the attainment of seeing right where they sat.
$580 Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
The Story of Nirgrantha Kāśyapa
$581 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, a certain poor brahmin who made his living as a farmer lived out in the mountains. One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed she gave birth to a child. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” and they named him, saying, “This is a child of the Kāśyapa clan, so his name will likewise be Kāśyapa .”
$582 They reared young Kāśyapa on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and when he grew up he went with his parents to work in the fields. As he looked on he saw hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of living beings being killed. He asked his father, “Father, you are causing hundreds of thousands of living beings to suffer. Why must you make your living this way?”
$583 “Son, this is the only way for us to make our living. There is no other choice,” his father replied.
The youth thought, “I will give up making a living this way and go live in the forest.” With this thought, [8.a] he resolved to go forth.
$584 The Blessed One had achieved unexcelled wisdom and began to act for the benefit of those to be tamed. In time he came to Rājagṛha, and the Blessed One’s fame spread far and wide. The Blessed One let fall a rain of nectar to satisfy living beings.
$585 When young Kāśyapa heard that the ascetic Gautama was staying in Rājagṛha and had let fall a rain of nectar to satisfy living beings, he immediately told his parents, “Mother, Father, I am going to practice the holy life in the presence of the ascetic Gautama,” and departed. He went to Rājagṛha as he had said, and there saw the naked saint Nirgrantha Jñātiputra.
$586 He thought, “There he is—the ascetic Gautama!” and went forth in his presence. After he went forth and studied their system of telling signs, Nirgrantha Jñātiputra became the foremost of his teachers. From that point on he was no longer known as Kāśyapa , and he took the name Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas.
$587 One day he saw the indications that he was near the end of his life, and he thought, “In seven days I shall be no more.” A deity who delighted in the doctrine of the Blessed One told him, “Don’t despair, Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas. The Blessed One teaches the path of definite escape from death. And he’s staying right here in Rājagṛha. Offer him your respect and service. If you do, things will go well for you.”
$588 Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas left Rājagṛha as soon as he heard this and set out for Bamboo Grove. On the way he thought, “Monks are modest and shy. Since I am a naked ascetic, I would not dare go and meet them in person, [8.b] so I won’t go to Bamboo Grove quite yet. Instead, I’ll remain here at the halfway point. Staying here, just halfway, I shall offer the ascetic Gautama my respect and service.”
$589 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$590 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$591 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail. [9.a]
$592 When the Blessed One focused his mind, he realized that the time had come to tame Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas, so he left Bamboo Grove and went to see Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas. When Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance he approached the Blessed One, and when he arrived he made all manner of entertaining and jovial conversation with him and then took a seat at one side.
$593 Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas requested the Blessed One, “Gautama, should there be an opportunity for you to answer questions, I would like to ask you about a few matters.”
The Blessed One replied, “ Kāśyapa , I have to go to Rājagṛha for a while for alms. This is not the time for me to answer your questions. Wait outside the grove and an opportunity will come for me to answer your questions.”
$594 “Gautama,” he replied, “if it’s possible for me to change my mind, then perhaps it’s possible that Gautama may change his mind as well.” So Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas beseeched him a second and third time, “Should there be an opportunity for you to answer questions, I would like to ask you about a few matters.”
$595 And the second and third time, the Blessed One told Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas, “ Kāśyapa , I have to go to Rājagṛha for a while for alms. This is not a good time for me to answer your questions, but wait outside of the grove a bit and the opportunity for me to answer your questions will come.”
$596 “Gautama,” he persisted, [9.b] “should there be an opportunity for you to answer questions, I would like to ask you about a few matters.”
“ Kāśyapa ,” the Blessed One replied, “a second and a third time you have insisted on discussing this. Inquire about whatever you wish, Kāśyapa .”
$597 “Tell me, Gautama, is suffering created by itself?” he asked.
“ Kāśyapa , I have not proclaimed that suffering is created by itself,” the Blessed One replied.
$598 “Tell me, Gautama, is suffering created by another?”
“ Kāśyapa , I have not proclaimed that suffering is created by another.”
$599 “Tell me, Gautama, is suffering created both by itself and by another?”
“ Kāśyapa , I have not proclaimed that suffering is created both by itself and by another.”
$600 “What then, Gautama? If suffering is not created by itself, nor created by another, does it then not arise from a cause?”
“ Kāśyapa , this too I have not proclaimed.”
$601 “What then, Gauta>ma? Aren’t you proclaiming that suffering is neither created by itself, nor created by another, nor arisen from a cause?”
“ Kāśyapa , if you are asking whether suffering is created by itself, created by another, or whether or not it arises from a cause, my answer is that I did not proclaim this.”
$602 “What then, Gautama? Is there no such thing as suffering?”
“ Kāśyapa , it’s not that there is no suffering. It merely is.”
$603 “Tell me, Gautama—if in fact suffering is self-created, can the Blessed One please teach me the Dharma by which I can come to know and see suffering?”
“ Kāśyapa , if sensation were self-existent, and experience were also self-existent, then suffering would be created by itself. But this is not what I proclaim, Kāśyapa.
$604 “ Kāśyapa, [10.a] if sensation were other than itself, and experience also other than itself, then suffering would be created by another. But this is not what I proclaim, Kāśyapa.
“ Kāśyapa , if sensation were self-existent, and experience also self-existent, and if at the same time sensation were other than itself, and experience likewise other than itself, then suffering would be created by itself and by another. But this is not what I proclaim, Kāśyapa.
$605 “ Kāśyapa , if there were no conditions for suffering, then suffering could not be created by itself, nor by another, nor would it arise from a cause. But this is not what I proclaim, Kāśyapa.
“The Tathāgata does not rely on the two extremes, but shows the Dharma of the middle way. If this is, that will occur. This having arisen, that will arise.
$606 “In this way, due to the condition of ignorance, there are formations. Due to the condition of formations, there is consciousness. Due to the condition of consciousness, there are name and form. Due to the conditions of name and form, there are the six sense bases. Due to the condition of the six sense bases, there is contact . Due to the condition of contact , there is sensation. Due to the condition of sensation, there is craving . Due to the condition of craving , there is grasping. Due the condition of grasping, there is becoming . Due to the condition of becoming , there is birth . Due to the condition of birth , there is old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and strife. Thus does this entire great heap of suffering arise.
$607 “So it is that without this, that will not occur. If this ceases, that will cease. In this way, due to the cessation of ignorance, formations cease. Due to the cessation of formations, consciousness will cease. Due to the cessation of consciousness, name and form will cease. Due to the cessation of name and form, the six sense bases will cease. Due to the cessation of the six sense bases, [10.b] contact will cease. Due to the cessation of contact , sensation will cease. Due to the cessation of sensation, craving will cease. Due to the cessation of craving , grasping will cease. Due to the cessation of grasping, becoming will cease. Due to the cessation of becoming, birth will cease. Due to the cessation of birth , old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and strife will cease. Thus does this entire great heap of suffering cease.”
$608 When he had explained this Dharma teaching, Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas was able to see these things unobscured, with the Dharma vision that has no trace of dust or stain with respect to phenomena. Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas perceived the truths, discovered the truths, realized the truths, and fathomed the truths to their very depths, until whatever doubts or hesitation he had he overcame.
$609 Then, of his own accord, completely unprompted, and fearless on account of the truths his teacher had shown him, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and declared to the Blessed One, “Lord, I have truly become a noble one. I have truly gone forth. Lord, I take refuge in the Blessed One, I take refuge in the Dharma, I take refuge in the Saṅgha. Please accept me as a lay vow holder, for I have truly come to faith. From this day forth I take refuge with all my heart.” Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas rejoiced, praised all that the Blessed One had said, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took leave of him.
$610 Not long after Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas had taken leave of the Blessed One, a milk cow kicked him and killed him. At the time of his death his senses [11.a] were clear, his appearance pure, and his complexion alabaster.
$611 A group of monks donned their lower garments and Dharma robes, and, carrying their alms bowls, they set out toward Rājagṛha for alms. Along the way they heard that at the halfway point of the path Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas had asked questions of the Blessed One, that not long after he had taken leave of the Blessed One a milk cow kicked him and killed him, and that at the time of his death his senses were clear, his appearance pure, and his complexion alabaster.
$612 After they heard this the monks took alms in Rājagṛha and ate their meal. Later, after they had finished taking alms, they put away their alms bowls and Dharma robes, washed their feet, and went to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$613 Once they had taken a seat at one side, the group of monks said to the Blessed One, “Lord, we monks donned our lower garments and Dharma robes, and carrying our alms bowls set out toward Rājagṛha for alms. Along the way we monks who were making our way to Rājagṛha for alms heard, Lord, that at the halfway point Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas had asked questions of the Blessed One, that not long after he had taken leave of the Blessed One a milk cow kicked him and killed him, and that at the time of his death his senses were clear, his appearance pure, and his complexion alabaster. Lord, what then was his destination? Into what state did he take birth? In what state did he die?”
$614 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “that noble child is a treasure. The Dharma he realized proceeded from my own. [11.b] He did not harm me. Monks, that noble child, having performed a singular good for the Dharma, attained nirvāṇa. Therefore, you should perform a reliquary pūjā.” The Blessed One proclaimed Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas’ excellence, and in Rājagṛha the gods declared that Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas had passed into parinirvāṇa.
$615 As soon as the extremists heard this they hoisted banners made of cotton, announcing on the highways, in the streets, at crossroads, and at forks in the road, “The ascetic Gautama claims that only his monastic discipline is comprehensive, that all others are not. Yet by practicing our code of conduct this man has passed into parinirvāṇa!” After they said this, they went to venerate his relics.
$616 The monks also went with the intention of venerating his relics, but the extremist mendicants told them, “He was a fellow practitioner of our code of conduct. Therefore, it is we who should perform the reliquary pūjā.”
“He was a fellow practitioner of our code of conduct,” the monks replied. “Therefore, it is we who should perform his reliquary pūjā.”
$617 “We have as our witnesses the gods who declared it in Rājagṛha,” said the extremist mendicants.
“Let us ask the gods whose code of conduct he practiced,” proposed the monks.
The extremist mendicants immediately began to supplicate the gods, petitioning them, “Devas, may you tell us whose code of conduct he practiced, and whose he did not.”
$618 The gods accomplished in the Dharma replied, “He [12.a] practiced the monks’ code of conduct. Through the Blessed One he realized the Dharma. Thus, in the intermediate state#175 between death and rebirth he passed into parinirvāṇa.”
$619 The extremist mendicants left the area in embarrassment as soon as they heard this. After the monks performed Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas’ reliquary pūjā, they went to Bamboo Grove and inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, what action did Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas take that ripened into his being kicked by a milk cow and killed?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that he committed and accumulated: . . .”
$620 At this point his backstory should be told in detail according to the tale of Puṣkarasārin,#176 up to the killing of the four sisters at the hands of their four brothers.
$621 “What action did Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas take that ripened such that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?” they asked.
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$622 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, his fame spread far and wide.
$623 “As the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa dwelt in Vārāṇasī, he let fall a rain of nectar to satisfy living beings. At that time there was a certain young brahmin also living in that region, and he heard that in Vārāṇasī the totally [12.b] and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa was letting fall a rain of nectar to satisfy living beings. When he heard this he traveled to Ṛṣivadana and approached the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Upon his arrival he touched his head to the feet of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$624 “Then the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa taught him the Dharma particularly suited to him. Having heard the Dharma from the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, he went for refuge, took the fundamental precepts, and then departed.
$625 “After that he gave gifts, made merit, went for refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life. At the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$626 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that brahmin then is none other than Nirgrantha Kinsman of the Kāśyapas. At that time he gave gifts, made merit, went for refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life. At the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$627 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, [13.a] and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, and not displeased me.”
The Story of Foremost Kāśyapa
$628 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, on a ridge among the mountains there lived a certain sage who had twelve thousand disciples. The sage was a master of all the scriptures, a person of great miracles and great power, who had placed all twelve thousand of his disciples in the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$629 The Blessed One, having given a definitive teaching on the ripening of karma beneath the waters of Lake Anavatapta, flew up out of Lake Anavatapta with a suite of five hundred attendants and traveled through the sky to the garden of Prince Jeta. The sage and his retinue saw the Blessed One traveling through the sky with his suite of attendants, and no sooner had they seen the Blessed One than they felt a surge of joy toward him and left everything behind to become his followers. When they arrived at the garden of Prince Jeta they entered and went to see the Blessed One, touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$630 The Blessed One directly apprehended the thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature of the twelve thousand sages, taught them the Dharma accordingly, and all twelve thousand sages, realizing the truths, instantly manifested the resultant state of non-return right where they sat. But due to his arrogance and pride about his learning, the head sage attained nothing at all.
$631 The twelve thousand sages rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, [13.b] “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$632 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led all twelve thousand sages to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship. The head sage went forth along with them, but once again he attained nothing at all.
$633 Hearing of their accomplishment, he studied and began to make effort such that before long he had mastered the Tripiṭaka, and become a proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of wisdom and freedom. One day the thought came to him, “I’ve taught the Dharma to thousands upon thousands of beings, but I am not considered a Dharma teacher. Since hearing that all my friends achieved arhatship I’m not sure what to do. I haven’t achieved anything of significance. I will put aside study and meditation for a while, and just concentrate on this.”
$634 He reflected on all that he had learned, pondered it, thought it through, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$635 Then the monks requested the Blessed One, [14.a] “Lord, tell us why, due to his arrogance and pride about his learning, the head sage did not achieve anything, and then by reflecting on all he had learned, pondering it, and thinking it through, he cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, he reflected, pondered, and thought until he generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Listen well!
$636 “Monks, in times gone by, a certain brahmin named Foremost Kāśyapa was living in the wilderness. One day, in search of roots and fruit, he went out onto the mountainside, where he saw twelve thousand sages. Elated at the sight of them, he thought, ‘While I have been leading the life of a householder, they have gone forth from household life, and consequently will be liberated from saṃsāra. I too shall go forth in their very presence!’ With this thought he left everything behind to go forth in the sages’ presence, and after joining them he gained perfect comprehension of all fields of knowledge.
$637 “One day the chief sage died, and the twelve thousand young brahmins began to grieve, wailing in misery and lamenting the sage’s death. Foremost Kāśyapa said to them, ‘Young brahmins, do not mourn so. Do not suffer so. Do not lament. I shall provide for all your needs.’ He called together all twelve thousand young brahmins, and, after giving them instructions to ponder, they too generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$638 “Some time later, Foremost Kāśyapa [14.b] thought, ‘My disciples have realized all the instructions that I myself have pondered, but what use are my studies to me if, because of arrogance and pride about them, I have not achieved anything?’ Then, by reflecting on all he had learned, pondering it, and thinking it through, he generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$639 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was Foremost Kāśyapa then is none other than this sage. At that time, because of his arrogance and pride, he did not achieve anything, and then, by reflecting on all he had learned, pondering it, and thinking it through, he generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now, as well, because of his arrogance and pride he did not achieve anything, and then, by reflecting on all he had learned, pondering it, and thinking it through, he cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.”
$640 The monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “What action did the sage and his disciples take that ripened such that they pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$641 “Lord, where did they make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as forty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha [15.a] known as Krakucchanda was in the world, Krakucchanda carried out all the activities of a buddha and passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. King Śobha performed a pūjā for his remains. He built a stūpa for his remains, made extensive offerings to the stūpa, and inaugurated the traditional festival of the stūpa.
$642 “When the time came for the traditional festival of the stūpa, in the realm of King Śobha there was a certain ruler from the wilderness who had twelve thousand attendants, and he likewise put great effort into making offerings to the stūpa, and prayed, ‘By the root of this virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. Going forth in the doctrine of a teacher just like this one may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$643 “When they saw this his attendants asked, ‘Your Majesty, what did you pray?’ and the king told them in detail. Then his attendants themselves prayed, ‘May we also, by entrusting ourselves to His Majesty, please and not displease a teacher just like this one. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$644 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that ruler from the wilderness then is none other than this sage. Those who were his twelve thousand attendants are now none other than these twelve thousand brahmins. At that time the actions of venerating the stūpa and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever they were born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, [15.b] and such that they pleased me, did not displease me, went forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$645 “So too all twelve thousand sages, by entrusting themselves to me, have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$646 “They also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all their lives then, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
The Story of Mounted on an Elephant
$647 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, there lived in Rājagṛha a certain elephant trainer of King Bimbisāra’s whose name was Elephant Heart. He was prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s.
$648 When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” and they named him, saying, “Since this child was born to Elephant Heart, the elephant trainer, under the constellation Citra , his name will be Citra Mounted on an Elephant.”
$649 They reared young Citra Mounted on an Elephant on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids. As the young man grew up, they made him study letters, [16.a] and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$650 One day his parents died, and King Bimbisāra appointed him as elephant trainer, passing on to him the work of his father. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and they enjoyed themselves and coupled.
Some time later, he found faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One, went for refuge and took the fundamental precepts, gave gifts and made merit, and went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One. Once he had gone forth, he studied the Tripiṭaka and became a proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of his wisdom and freedom.
$651 One day he thought, “I have completed whatever duties were before me in terms of my education. From now on I will put my efforts into contemplation.” So he took up contemplation, and by foregoing sleep from dusk to dawn, he progressed as far as the meditation known as the absorption of neither discrimination nor non-discrimination. He gathered five hundred disciples and they became his attendants. [16.b] He left and wandered the countryside with his disciples. Eventually he returned from wandering the countryside, and the ministers informed King Bimbisāra that he had gone forth.
$652 “Your Majesty, Citra Mounted on an Elephant has gone forth, and has no children. Since he has no children, everything he owns is Your Majesty’s to command.”
“I only have authority over the wealth of the dead,” the king replied. “I have no authority over the wealth of the living. But this noble child yet lives, and it’s always possible for sages to reverse course and become householders once again.” So the king would not take anything from his house.
$653 Citra Mounted on an Elephant’s wife heard that he had arrived in Rājagṛha with his five hundred attendants, and when she heard this she invited him and his five hundred disciples to the house and offered them food. His wife wondered, “Has he done what was before him, or is he just an ordinary person? If he is an ordinary person, I shall devise a means of bringing him back.”
$654 As he was eating his food she dropped in front of him a copper pot from the roof of the house, and he was startled by the sound. He began to poke idly at the copper pot with his knife as he ate his food. Seeing all this, the wife thought, “He’s no arhat. Since he’s just an ordinary person, I’ll be able to bring him back.”
$655 She bowed at his feet and said, “My lord, our wealth has been dwindling on account of your absence. So, lord, please permit me to request you and your five hundred disciples to come here for your meal again tomorrow.” Citra Mounted on an Elephant assented to his wife by his silence.
$656 The next day she offered food to one hundred and fifty of his attendants, and on the following day she only invited one hundred. In this way the woman gradually reduced the number of his attendants, until on the last day [17.a] he was the only one to whom she offered food. Once she had offered him food, to bring him back again she began to talk about being destitute. “My lord, since you have been absent, even the servants insult me,” she said.
$657 Now, earlier she had instructed one of the young servants, “As I’m sitting there listening to the Dharma you are to summon me three times—say, ‘Get over here!’ When I come to you, grab me by the hair and beat me in sight of our lord.” So the young servant did just that.
“You see, my lord?” the woman said. “They treat me this way even in your sight.”
$658 Hearing this, in an instant Citra Mounted on an Elephant was consumed with fury. In his rage he took up a sword that his wife had earlier placed on the bed, drew it from its sheath, and charged at the young servant. His wife threw herself at his feet.
“Wait, lord—don’t be rash!” she pleaded. “You can punish him after you’ve given up your precepts.”
$659 So Citra Mounted on an Elephant gave back the fundamental precepts there before his wife. He cast aside the colorful robes of the holy, donned householder’s clothing, and his wife said, “I did this, lord, as a means of bringing you back. Lord, I ask therefore that you not harbor resentment against him. Lord, the household’s wealth is vast. From this day forth, lord, may you stay here and make use of it as you please, giving gifts and making merit.”
$660 When King Bimbisāra heard that Citra Mounted on an Elephant had given back his precepts and was in decline, the king summoned him and offered him his previous position. In the morning a group of monks donned their lower garments and Dharma robes, and, carrying their begging [17.b] bowls, went for alms in Rājagṛha. On their way for alms in Rājagṛha the group of monks heard that Citra Mounted on an Elephant had given back his precepts and was in decline. Upon hearing this, they took alms in Rājagṛha, ate their meal and wiped their hands. Then they set aside taking alms, put away their alms bowls and Dharma robes, washed their feet, and went to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$661 Once they had taken a seat at one side, the group of monks informed the Blessed One, “Lord, in the morning we monks donned our lower garments and Dharma robes, and, carrying our alms bowls, set out toward Rājagṛha for alms, when we monks who were making our way to Rājagṛha for alms heard, Lord, that Citra Mounted on an Elephant had given back his precepts, and was in decline.”
“Monks,” the Blessed One Replied, “that noble child will not be at home for long. He will go forth in my very doctrine once again, and then cast away all afflictive emotions and manifest arhatship.”
$662 One day the Blessed One saw that the time had come to tame Citra Mounted on an Elephant. In the morning he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he went for alms in Rājagṛha. In going for alms he eventually came to the house where Citra Mounted on an Elephant was staying and stood at the door of the house. In order to bring Citra Mounted on an Elephant back, he bathed the entire house in rays of light that gave it the appearance of refined gold, whereupon Citra Mounted on an Elephant thought, “To whom could this light [18.a] belong? There’s no doubt—it can only be the Blessed One. Wherever the Blessed One may be, may he think of me.”
$663 At that moment a messenger arrived to inform Citra Mounted on an Elephant that the Blessed One was at his door. With the greatest respect he went to see the Blessed One, and upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and inquired of him, “Blessed One, what word can you grant us?”
$664 The Blessed One said to him, “Give up living at home. Come with me, and go forth in my presence once again.”
From life to life the Blessed One had never contravened the words of his guru nor the words of those who were like gurus to him. For this reason no one can contravene the words of the Blessed One.
$665 Citra Mounted on an Elephant replied, “I shall do as the Blessed One has instructed,” and followed the Blessed One. The Blessed One brought him to Bamboo Grove, led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions with diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship.
$666 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did Citra Mounted on an Elephant take that ripened such that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$667 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?” [18.b]
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times gone by, in a certain mountain village there lived a householder named Citra. He was prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s.
“One day in spring the tree branches in the garden had thickened and the flowers were in bloom.
$668 Now in times when a blessed one has not arisen in the world, in compassion for the destitute and suffering the solitary buddhas appear, taking up residence in remote places. Solitary as the rhinoceros, in all the world they alone are worthy of offerings. So it was that there was a certain solitary buddha who, wishing to go for alms on that mountainside, heard the sounds of music coming from the park and thought, ‘What need is there to go out onto the mountainside for the sake of this stomach, so difficult to fill? I will go into the garden. My alms can come from there as well.’
$669 “The solitary buddha entered the garden, where the householder saw him, elegant in body and elegant in mind. When he saw the solitary buddha, the householder experienced a surge of joy toward him. In his joy he offered him food, and said, ‘Noble one, where are you staying? Let me offer you my respectful service.’
“The solitary buddha replied, ‘I am staying at such-and-such a place, deep in the forest,’ and departed.
$670 “After that, from time to time the householder would offer him a meal and his respectful service. One day the householder went to see him and found the solitary buddha sitting beneath a tree as if asleep, legs crossed, his body drawn up like a nāga king. Upon seeing the solitary buddha living in such solitude, he felt a strong desire to go forth, so he [19.a] approached the solitary buddha, touched his head to his feet, and said, ‘Noble one, please lead me to go forth. In your presence I too wish to practice the holy life.’
$671 “ ‘I don’t lead people to go forth,’ the solitary buddha told him. ‘The sages lead people to go forth. Therefore, take yourself to the sages.’
“When he heard this the householder immediately gave up household affairs, gave gifts and made merit, and went forth to join the sages. Having thus gone forth he generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. After he had gone forth, the solitary buddha passed into parinirvāṇa.
$672 “Then the thought came to one of the sages, ‘I will go to this spiritual teacher, so supremely worthy of offerings, and offer him my respect and service. Through him I shall understand the distinctions between the higher states.’ He went to the forest but he could not find the solitary buddha. Spotting another solitary buddha there in the forest, he asked after him.
$673 “ ‘O noble one, there was a monk with such-and-such a build and bearing staying in this forest. Do you know where he went?’
“ ‘He passed into parinirvāṇa,’ the solitary buddha told him.
$674 “ ‘Where was he when he passed into parinirvāṇa?’ he asked, whereupon the solitary buddha showed him his remains. He built a reliquary stūpa for the remains and venerated it with burning sticks of incense, incense powder, incense cones, and flowers, praying, ‘Oh, by this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. May I achieve such great virtues.’ [19.b] Having prayed thus, he departed from the region. Some time after that he died, transmigrated, and took rebirth in Brahmāloka.
$675 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that householder then is none other than Citra Mounted on an Elephant. The act of respectfully serving the solitary buddha and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. I am more exalted than even one hundred billion solitary buddhas, and he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$676 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why Citra Mounted on an Elephant’s wife found a means by which to indulge her desires with him.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, his wife found a means by which to indulge her desires with him. Listen well!
$677 “Monks, in times gone by, during King Brahmadatta’s reign in the city of Vārāṇasī, one of King Brahmadatta’s magistrates was a certain brahmin named Agnidatta . One day his wife conceived, and later she gave birth to twins. At the elaborate feast celebrating their birth they asked, ‘What names should we give these children?’ and they named them, saying, ‘Since these are Agnidatta ’s children, one’s name will be Son of Fire, and the other’s will be Tongue of Fire.’
$678 “They reared young Son of Fire and Tongue of Fire on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as they grew up they studied letters, [20.a] brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, they became masters of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time they mastered the eighteen sciences.
$679 “At a certain point the two came to see that their father administrated the affairs of the kingdom both righteously and unrighteously, and an idea came to them. They thought, ‘When our father is no longer with us, we will be appointed to take over the work of our father. Therefore, we should give up living at home.’ They thus told their parents, ‘For those who fear for their next life, it is better to live deep in the forest among the wild animals, wearing tree bark for clothing and eating fruit, than to kill, bind, and torture for the sake of a kingdom.’
“ ‘Mother, Father,’ they continued, ‘we are going to live in a forest devoted to austerities.’
$680 “Their parents asked them, ‘Children, why are you going to take up the austere practices of the sages, when after our deaths you could come and share the crown?’
“ ‘This is exactly what we are afraid of!’ the two children replied. ‘That’s why we want to go live deep in the forest. We are not capable of indulging in desire.’
$681 “Their parents tried many times, but they were not able to stop them, so they said, ‘Go forth, then. And should you achieve any special attainments, [20.b] please come see us.’
“ ‘As you wish,’ the two children replied.
$682 “The children bid a final farewell to their parents and traveled deep into the forest. After they had gone forth, they generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges. One day they remembered their promise to their parents that they would return to them if they achieved any special attainments. ‘Let us go, then,’ they said. They traveled through the sky and arrived before their parents. Seeing this, their parents felt a surge of joy toward them. In their joy they said, ‘The two of you desire alms. The two of us desire merit. Stay here in our garden, then, and we will offer you food.’
“ ‘As you wish,’ the two replied.
$683 “They fashioned a hut of branches and leaves and stayed there in the garden. They came to be held in high esteem and were revered, honored, and venerated. King Brahmadatta’s magistrate heard that the two children had become persons of great miracles and great power, and this immediately filled him with awe. He extended them an invitation and offered them food. After offering them food he bowed down at their feet and said, ‘Please come and see me from time to time.’
“ ‘As you wish, Deva,’ they replied.
$684 “So from time to time the two of them would travel through the sky to the royal palace and go to see King Brahmadatta. Upon their arrival King Brahmadatta [21.a] would take them from the sky into his lap and place them in their seats, and after contenting them with many good, wholesome foods he would sit before them to listen to the Dharma.
$685 “One day King Brahmadatta’s subjects who lived out in the mountains began to revolt. He arrayed the four divisions of his army and set out, telling his daughter, ‘When the two sages come you should serve and respect them in just the same way that I do.’ Having spoken thus the king departed.
$686 “Soon after, the sage Son of Fire sent the sage Tongue of Fire on an errand to the royal palace. He traveled through the sky to the royal palace, and upon the sage’s arrival the young woman received him, taking him from the sky into her lap, embracing him, and placing him in his seat.
$687 “A woman’s touch is a dangerous thing. No sooner had the woman touched the sage Tongue of Fire than his miraculous powers began to dwindle. The young woman, noting that the sage was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, became very attached to him, and the two went off to an isolated place and slept together. When the retinue of queens heard of this, they thought, ‘If we say even a word to the sage, it’s possible the sage would use his great miracles and great power to curse us.’ Afraid, they were unable to say anything. The sage remained at the royal palace, not daring to travel by foot out of embarrassment.
$688 “Eventually King Brahmadatta returned from his victory over the mountain folk, arrived at the royal palace, and he heard that the sage Tongue of Fire had come there. The king hurried to see him and offered him many good, wholesome foods. His daughter came along, also bearing food and drink for the sage. As soon as the sage saw her he was overcome with desire. His desire for her intoxicated him, and before the king’s very eyes [21.b] he reached out, saying, ‘Take me into your arms.’ When the king saw this, he immediately took up a sharp sword to slay the sage.
$689 “Seeing this, the young woman said to the sage, ‘Preceptor, what is this? Perhaps you are confused because of some secret, pressing need, and now you are reaching your arms out?’
“King Brahmadatta thought, ‘I believe that is the case. This sage must be confused,’ and quickly offered him something to drink. Then they offered him food and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$690 “Now the sage Son of Fire, who was living in a forest devoted to austerities, wondered, ‘Why has the sage Tongue of Fire still not returned?’ He looked out and saw that he was spending his time indulging his desires. ‘He may now lose his life,’ he thought, so he traveled through the sky to the royal palace.
$691 “King Brahmadatta took the sage from the sky into his lap and placed him on his seat, then sat before him to listen to the Dharma. After he had explained just a little Dharma, he brought his younger brother back with him through the sky and returned him to the forest devoted to austerities. There he gave him instructions for contemplation such that he was again able to generate the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$692 “King Brahmadatta’s retinue of queens thought, ‘This young woman has committed such unfortunate deeds. If we do not apprise him, we too will come to regret this.’ With this in mind they told the king. When he heard what they had to say King Brahmadatta was immediately overcome with great hatred. He arrayed the four divisions of his army and set out to where the sages lived.
$693 “The sage Tongue of Fire saw that King Brahmadatta had set out with the four divisions of his army and that they were on their way. [22.a] ‘Why would he come here?’ he wondered, and looking out, he thought, ‘He wants to kill me!’ Knowing this to be the case, he rose up into the sky and sat there to instill faith in the king. King Brahmadatta saw that the sage Tongue of Fire had risen up into the sky and was just sitting there, and at the sight of him his fury disappeared, and he became uncertain as to whether or not the man had done as he had heard.
$694 “ ‘Well then,’ he thought, and he said in verse:
“ ‘I heard, brahmin Tongue of Fire, You indulged your desires. Tell me— Were these words true? Or is this Something you did not do?’
$695 “He answered in verse:
“ ‘Great King, all that you have heard Others say of me is true. I staggered down an awful path, Drunk on a swig of lust.’
$696 “At that, King Brahmadatta began to feel doubt. He approached the sage Son of Fire and asked him, ‘Sage, tell me, why would I hear such things?’
“ ‘Great King,’ the sage replied, ‘it may indeed be true in exactly the way you heard, for the afflictive emotions are overpowering.’
“ ‘But how can it be that he indulged his desires in this way and yet is still possessed of these miraculous powers?’ the king asked.
$697 “ ‘Great King,’ the sage replied, ‘when he indulged his desires his miraculous powers dwindled. I brought him away from that place and gave him instructions, teaching him a method of contemplation. Later he began to perform miracles again.’
“Hearing this the king felt a surge of joy toward him. He bowed down at the sage’s feet, asked his forgiveness, and departed.
$698 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was my younger brother then is none other than Citra Mounted on an Elephant. [22.b] The one who was the young woman then is none other than his wife. At that time he fell from the celibate state and began to indulge his desires until I lifted him up again and placed him in the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Now as well he has fallen from the celibate state and indulged his desires, and I have lifted him up and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$699 “He also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life then, his faculties ripened, and now he has been liberated.”
The Story of Saraṇa
$700 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, King Pradyota reigned in Ujjayinī, and King Udayana reigned in Vatsa. The two did not agree with one another, and from time to time a great many people were killed.
$701 When Venerable Kātyāyanaputra cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship, he thought, “The Blessed One has dispelled so many kinds of suffering and anguish, brought me so many kinds of happiness and bliss, cleared away so many of my sins and nonvirtues, and secured for me such virtues. After I entrusted myself to the Blessed Buddha as my spiritual friend, he led me over the mountain pass of bones and dried up an ocean of blood and tears. How could I repay the Blessed One’s kindness?”
$702 And then he thought, “Anytime a blessed buddha arises in the world, [23.a] it is only to benefit beings. Surely then I should also act for the benefit of beings!” Reflecting in this way, he began to wonder, “Whom might I tame?” Then he looked out, and he saw that he could tame many in Vatsa.
$703 He went to see the Blessed One, and upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward him with palms pressed together, and implored him, “Lord, I wish to go out into the countryside.”
$704 The Blessed One replied, “Go, Kātyāyanaputra. Deliver others just as you yourself have crossed over. Liberate others just as you yourself have been liberated. Relieve others just as you yourself have found relief. Lead others to pass beyond all sorrow just as you yourself have completely passed beyond all sorrow.”
$705 Venerable Kātyāyanaputra touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and departed to travel through the countryside with a company of five hundred. They made their way, traveling and traveling, until they eventually arrived in the land of Ujjayinī. There he led King Caṇḍapradyota to take up the doctrine of the Buddha. Then he traveled to Vatsa and led King Udayana to dwell in sublime faith. He brought many to faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One.
$706 One day King Udayana of Vatsa’s queen conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him Saraṇa. They reared young Saraṇa on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he [23.b] flourished like a lotus in a lake.
$707 As he grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$708 One day young Saraṇa entrusted himself to Venerable Kātyāyanaputra, found faith in the teaching of the Blessed One, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts. Then he came to see that his father administrated the affairs of the kingdom both righteously and unrighteously, and he thought, “After my father’s death the throne will be ceded to me. I have no need for a kingdom. Instead, I will go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One in order to ford the floodwaters and completely escape my fetters with diligence, practice, and effort.” With this thought he asked for his parents’ permission, went forth as a novice in the presence of Venerable Kātyāyanaputra, and received full ordination.
Venerable Kātyāyanaputra thought, “He should leave this country,” and led him to settle down in Ujjayinī.
$709 One morning, Venerable Saraṇa donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, went for alms in the city of Ujjayinī. [24.a] He did not know his way around the area, nor was he very familiar with the streets and thoroughfares. As he went for alms he eventually came to the main gate of King Caṇḍapradyota’s palace, and it so happened that the gatekeeper was not there.
$710 He entered the palace, and the royal queens saw his fine form, elegant and muscular. At the sight of him they experienced a surge of joy and thought, “What a finely formed, elegant, muscular young monk, upholding the holy life!” In their joy they prepared a seat, invited him to sit there, and contented him with many good, wholesome foods. Then they gathered around Venerable Saraṇa and placed him in the middle to listen to the Dharma.
$711 As he was sitting there, King Caṇḍapradyota came to see his retinue of queens. Now when the king enters their midst it is customary for his queens to rise to receive him, but because they so much enjoyed listening to the Dharma, they neither rose nor greeted him. At this King Caṇḍapradyota wondered, “What is this? Why do my queens not receive me?” The king became suspicious and approached his retinue of queens in anger. He looked about, saw Venerable Saraṇa there, surrounded by the queens, and bristled with rage. In his anger he thought, “This monk is ogling my wives, that’s why they’re not receiving me!” Then he thought, “I will watch a while and see whether he is he rid of lust.”
$712 Thereupon he inquired of Venerable Saraṇa, “Tell me, are you an arhat?”
“No, Great King, I am not,” he replied.
“Tell me,” the king continued, “have you attained the resultant state of non-return, or once-return, [24.b] or stream entry? Have you attained the sphere of absorption of neither discrimination nor non-discrimination, the sphere of absorption of nothingness, the sphere of absorption of infinite consciousness, and the sphere of absorption of infinite space? Have you attained the fourth absorption? The third? The second? Or the first?”#177
“No, Great King, I have not,” he replied.
$713 The king thought, “This monk is not rid of lust. He has not trained under a preceptor nor under a spiritual master. I shall train him, then!” And he summoned his personal attendants, who lashed the monk viciously before letting him go.
His skin lacerated from the lashing, Venerable Saraṇa angrily thought, “I have been wrongly accused, and now this cruel#178 king of this wicked age has thrashed me. I must go now and stay in my father’s country. There I shall array the four divisions of his army to rout this cruel king of this wicked age and trample him to dust.”
$714 He went to see Venerable Kātyāyanaputra. Upon his arrival he bowed down at Venerable Kātyāyanaputra’s feet and told him, “My preceptor, I have been wrongly accused and thrashed by a cruel king of this wicked age. I shall now go to my parents, and when I get there I will array the four divisions of my father’s army to rout this cruel king of this wicked age and trample him to dust. Therefore, I am requesting to give back my precepts.”
$715 “Child,” replied the elder monk, “don’t fall under the sway of anger. Did the Blessed One not state that renunciants should meet with forbearance these eight worldly concerns: gain and loss, fame and obscurity, praise and blame, and happiness and suffering?” Three times the elder monk tried to stop him, but he was unable to do so. So Venerable Kātyāyanaputra told him, “If that’s the case, my boy, and you want to go, since it’s almost dark now [25.a] and there is danger of lions, tigers, leopards, and bears on the path, stay here for the night. In the morning you can go.”
“As you wish, preceptor,” he replied.
$716 As he was sleeping in the same dwelling as the elder monk, to stop him Venerable Kātyāyanaputra performed a miracle that caused him, as he slept, to dream he gave back his precepts, then went to his father’s country and bid his father to let him rule the kingdom. His father offered him the four divisions of his army and told him, “First exterminate your enemy.” After hearing this, he immediately arrayed the four divisions of the army and led the soldiers into King Caṇḍapradyota’s country.
$717 But King Caṇḍapradyota defeated him in battle, overcame him and put him to flight, and then captured him alive and sent him to be executed. The executioners led him away, and as they neared the spot where he was to be executed, in the dream he looked about him, saw Venerable Kātyāyanaputra going for alms in the city of Ujjayinī, and shouted, “Preceptor, please protect me! Please take on the difficult task of saving my precious life!”
$718 He awoke still terrified and sprang up, believing that what he dreamt had really taken place. Venerable Kātyāyanaputra said to him, “Son, what you saw was just a dream. Don’t be afraid.”
Saraṇa was immediately relieved to hear this, and he started to think, “It’s the ‘me’ that is here that is Saraṇa. I haven’t harmed a single being. Under the sway of anger I would kill many, even in my dreams. [25.b] I will give up all such ambitions.” Then the elder monk, recognizing his disillusionment, taught him the Dharma accordingly. Saraṇa thus cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship right where he sat.
$719 King Caṇḍapradyota heard that the monk he had lashed was King Udayana’s son and came to see him. He bowed down at his feet, and begged his forgiveness. He entrusted himself to him, and invited Kātyāyanaputra to take his meal with him for seven days.
$720 One day Venerable Kātyāyanaputra thought, “I must rid myself of this worldly profit and acclaim,” so he went with Venerable Saraṇa to Rājagṛha. The monks heard what had happened to Venerable Saraṇa and asked the Blessed One, “Lord, what action did Saraṇa take that ripened into his taking birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth? What action did he take that ripened into his being lashed by King Caṇḍapradyota, and that after that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$721 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that he committed and accumulated:
“Monks, in times gone by, King Brahmadatta reigned in the city of Vārāṇasī. One day, attended by his retinue of queens, he went into the gardens, where he fell asleep. The women wandered here and there in the garden, their hearts set on finding flowers and fruit.
$722 “Now in times when a blessed one has not arisen in the world, the solitary buddhas appear. So it was that a solitary buddha [26.a] had bedded down in that garden for the night. The women saw him there, elegant in body and elegant in mind, and felt a surge of joy at the sight of him. In their joy they bowed down at his feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$723 “When the king awoke and his retinue of queens did not appear, he seethed with rage. The king took up a sharp sword and went to track them down. He saw the solitary buddha expounding the Dharma to his retinue of queens and thought, ‘This monk is ogling my wives!’ and became even more enraged. He gave orders to his personal attendants, who lashed the solitary buddha viciously before letting him go.
$724 “The solitary buddha thought, ‘It’s not right for this emotionally afflicted person, who has become so abased, to go on roaming forever. I have to help him.’ So he rose up into the sky, making a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning.
$725 “Ordinary people are quickly brought to faith by miracles. The king thus felt a surge of joy at the sight of this, and in his joy he bowed down at the solitary buddha’s feet like a tree felled by a saw, saying, ‘Oh great fortunate one, please, please come down. I am mired in misdeeds! Please reach down and lift me up!’
$726 “Out of compassion for him, the solitary buddha descended, whereupon the king bowed down at his feet, asked his forgiveness, and provided for his every need for as long as he lived. There in the park he fashioned a hut of branches and leaves, and respectfully provided for his every need.
$727 “One day the solitary buddha thought, ‘What’s left to be done with this body? I will enter the realm of nirvāṇa.’ After reflecting in this way, he made a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning, [26.b] and passed into parinirvāṇa.
$728 “After that the king venerated his remains. He built a reliquary stūpa for the remains, made a large offering to the stūpa, and prayed, ‘May I not experience the results of the act of doing harm to such a pure being. By the root of virtue of having paid homage to him, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$729 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was King Brahmadatta then is none other than Saraṇa. The act of harming the solitary buddha ripened such that wherever he was born, his body was lashed until he died.
“I am more exalted than even one hundred billion solitary buddhas, and now he has pleased me, and not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$730 “He also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life then, his faculties ripened, and now he has been liberated.”
The Mṛgavratins
$731 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, the Mṛgavratins of the province of Videha, a group of ascetics who took vows to live as deer, were living in the company of some five hundred deer, draped in deerskin and wearing horns, eating grass, and drinking water.
$732 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path [27.a] to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$733 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$734 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$735 The Blessed One thought, “The time has come to tame these five hundred Mṛgavratins.” So the Blessed One performed a miracle that caused the Mṛgavratins to see the deer headed to Rājagṛha, [27.b] and having seen the deer, to travel with them to Rājagṛha. After they had done so, the deer that the Blessed One had emanated disappeared.
$736 A great crowd of people caught sight of them and began to mock them, and since they were being mocked, they left Rājagṛha and traveled to Bamboo Grove. Out of compassion for them, the Blessed One then took a seat facing them. The Mṛgavratins saw the Blessed One from a distance, and at the sight of the Blessed One, they felt joy toward him. In their joy they approached the Blessed One, touched their heads to his feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$737 The Blessed One directly apprehended the thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature of the five hundred Mṛgavratins and taught them the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$738 After they saw the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
$739 “Lord,” [28.a] the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “what action did these five hundred monks take that ripened into them adopting the mannerisms of deer, eating grass and drinking water with the deer, and that they pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$740 “These monks committed and accumulated the following actions,” the Blessed One replied.
“Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, he traveled through the countryside with a great saṅgha of monks and came to Rājagṛha.
$741 “At that time in Rājagṛha there was a certain brahmin with five hundred disciples living in a forest devoted to austerities. He saw the Blessed Kāśyapa and his disciples, and upon seeing them he said to the young brahmins, ‘Boys, look at Kāśyapa’s monks—roaming about like deer, no place to stay, just wandering off wherever they please!’ One day the brahmin and his five hundred disciples found faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One, and he and his five hundred disciples went forth in the presence of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.
$742 “Having gone forth, they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and while they may not have attained any great virtues, at the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘While we may not have attained any great virtues, still we have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced the holy life all our lives. [28.b] Therefore, may we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$743 “O monks, what do you think? Those who were the five hundred monks then are none other than these Mṛgavratins. The act of speaking harshly to the monks and calling them a bunch of deer ripened such that for five hundred lifetimes they took rebirth as deer. Now they are in their final existence, and until reaching this final state they continued to adopt the mannerisms of deer.
$744 “At that time they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$745 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Story of Candrā
$746 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī there lived a certain great, high brahmin named Candrasukha. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife. As they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one [29.a] day his wife conceived, and the impulse arose in her, “Wouldn’t it be nice if I could debate the advocates of the different philosophical schools!” She told her husband, “Lord, I’m having certain impulses—thinking things like, ‘Wouldn’t it be nice if I could debate the advocates of the different philosophical schools!’ ” The brahmin was skilled in the interpretation of signs, and the idea came to him that it was on account of the being in her womb that she had such impulses.
$747 After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating her birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” and they named her, saying, “Since this is Candrasukha’s child, her name will be Candrā.”
$748 They reared young Candrā on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and she flourished like a lotus in a lake. As she grew up, they educated her in letters there at home. Before long she mastered her letters, and there in the house she learned all of the scriptures from her father. She went on to defeat the advocates of the different philosophical schools and to master all the verses that she studied.
One day she heard that there was a certain ascetic in Śrāvastī named Gautama who claimed to be omniscient and all-seeing. When she heard this, she was immediately filled with wonder, and thought, “I will go and see what the ascetic Gautama is really like.”
$749 She asked for her parents’ permission and traveled to the garden of Prince Jeta, where she saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. [29.b] He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When she saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled her with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$750 Full of such joy she approached the Blessed One, and upon her arrival she touched her head to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One directly apprehended her thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, taught her the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the woman destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where she sat.
$751 After she saw the truths, she rose from her seat, drew down the right shoulder of her upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested, “Blessed One, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$752 The Blessed One presented her to Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī, and Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī led her to go forth as a novice, conferred on her full ordination, and instructed her. She cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
$753 At that time the Blessed One spoke to the monks, saying, “The nuns should meet together separately for their formal acts.” Since Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī was unable to recite the Prātimokṣa Sūtra, [30.a] she went to see the Blessed One. Upon her arrival she touched her head to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$754 Once she had taken a seat at one side, Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī beseeched the Blessed One, “The Blessed One has stated that the monks should meet separately for their formal acts, and that the nuns should also meet separately for their formal acts. Having said this, the Blessed One has taught the Prātimokṣa Sūtra to the monks, but has not taught it to the nuns. If the Blessed One teaches the Prātimokṣa Sūtra to the nuns, Blessed One, I shall seek to grasp it. It is impossible for the blessed buddhas to explain each word as they teach the Dharma, for there’s not enough time.”
The Blessed One replied to Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī, “Gautamī, if it can be grasped after I have spoken it just one time, then I shall teach it.”
$755 At that time the nun Candrā was there in the assembly. She drew down the right shoulder of her upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and beseeched the Blessed One, “Blessed One, please teach the Prātimokṣa Sūtra . If it is spoken but one time I can grasp it.”
$756 Thereupon the Blessed One taught the Prātimokṣa Sūtra to the nuns. Though it was spoken only once, the nun Candrā mastered it and thereupon she also mastered the Tripiṭaka. Because she had learned all the verses immediately upon hearing them, she was commended by the Blessed One as foremost among keepers of the teachings.
$757 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “what action did the nun Candrā take that ripened into her birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that having learned all the scriptures and defeated in debate [30.b] the advocates of all the different philosophical schools, she pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, manifested arhatship, and was able to grasp all the teachings such that the Blessed One commended her as foremost among keepers of the teachings?”
“It came about by the power of her prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$758 “When did she make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there was a certain woman who went forth in his teaching. The totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa had commended the preceptor who led her to go forth as foremost among keepers of the teachings.
$759 “After practicing pure conduct all her life, at the time of her death she prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Just as the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa commended my preceptor as foremost among keepers of the teachings, may the peerless Śākyamuni, King of the Śākyas, [31.a] commend me as foremost among keepers of the teachings as well.’
$760 “O monks, what do you think? The one who went forth as a nun in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa then is none other than the nun Candrā. At that time she went forth, practiced pure conduct all her life, and prayed thus at the time of her death.
$761 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that she has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship, and that I have commended her as foremost among keepers of the teachings.”
The Kinnara Spirits: Two Stories
The First “Kinnara” Story
$762 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with glowing, golden skin and a well-rounded head, long arms, a broad brow, a fine and prominent nose, and eyebrows that met. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” and they named him, saying, “Since this boy is extremely beautiful, and his appearance just like that of a kinnara spirit, his name will be Kinnara .”
$763 They reared young Kinnara on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, [31.b] and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. As he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$764 Soon word spread throughout the six cities that in Śrāvastī such-and-such a householder’s child had an appearance just like that of a kinnara spirit. When the people heard this they were amazed, so they rushed to see him. Soon he became arrogant about his appearance and would not bow or stand out of respect for anyone. “No one strikes as fine a figure as I,” he thought.
“We must dispel his pride,” his parents thought. “We shall show him the Blessed One.”
$765 “Oh child,” they said, “do not think that no one strikes as fine a figure as you. Child, you have not seen the Blessed One. Your appearance is not even a hundredth, not even a thousandth, not even a hundred thousandth as fine as his.”
Upon hearing this he immediately began thinking, “We shall see whether the ascetic Gautama is really more handsome and well proportioned than I.” He went to see the Blessed One accompanied by a great crowd.
$766 The boy saw the Blessed One from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. [32.a] He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When he saw the Blessed One, all his arrogance about his own appearance vanished, and he experienced a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$767 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, young Kinnara destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat. After seeing the truths, he asked for his parents’ permission, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
$768 “Lord,” the monks requested of the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the Blessed One dispelled this youth’s arrogance about his appearance and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I dispelled his arrogance about his appearance and placed him in the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Listen well!
$769 “Monks, in times gone by, there lived a certain brahmin in the city of Vārāṇasī. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful.
$770 “They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, [32.b] ghee, and milk solids, and when he grew up he became arrogant about his appearance. He would not speak sincerely to anyone, or bow, or stand out of respect. Soon his parents thought, ‘We must dispel his arrogance about his appearance, for if we don’t, it will never subside.’
$771 “At that time there lived a certain sage in one area of Vārāṇasī who had all the five superknowledges, a person of great miracles and great power. The brahmin said to the sage, ‘Our son is arrogant about his appearance—he will not speak sincerely to anyone and will neither bow nor stand. Please, dispel his arrogance about his appearance.’ The sage assented to the brahmin by his silence, and the brahmin took leave of the sage.
$772 “ ‘Child,’ the brahmin said, ‘Do not be so arrogant as to think that no one is your equal in appearance. In such-and-such a place devoted to austerities there lives a sage, and your appearance is not even a hundredth, not even a thousandth, not even a hundred thousandth as fine as his.’
$773 “The young man was astonished, and in his astonishment he went to see the sage. Upon seeing the young man, the sage emanated himself so that his appearance was superior to the youth’s own. From a distance the young man saw the sage, who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. He lost his arrogance about his own appearance, and felt joy toward the sage. In his joy he approached the sage, and upon his arrival he touched his head to his feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. Then the sage taught the young man the Dharma particularly suited to him, and the young man went forth in that very sage’s presence. As a renunciant [33.a] he generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$774 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then. The one who was that young man then is none other than this young man. At that time I dispelled his arrogance about his appearance and placed him in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well I have dispelled his arrogance about his appearance and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$775 “He also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life then, his faculties ripened, and now he has been liberated.”
The Second “Kinnara” Story
$776 When the Blessed One was in Kapilavastu visiting his father and his son, one day King Śuddhodana invited the Blessed One for a meal, so the next day the Blessed One took his meal with the king’s retinue of queens. After the Blessed One had taken his meal with the retinue of queens and was on his way back, Yaśodharā climbed to the roof of the house and stood there gazing after the Blessed One. When she could not see him anymore, she leapt from the roof, and as she did so, by the power of the Buddha the ground became like a cotton cushion stuffed with wool, such that she was not harmed in the least.
$777 When the monks heard about these events, they requested the Blessed Buddha, “Lord, tell us why on the Blessed One’s account Yaśodharā sought to give up her life.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, on my account she gave up her life. [33.b] Listen well!
$778 “Monks, in times gone by, King Brahmadatta reigned in the city of Vārāṇasī. One day King Brahmadatta arrayed the four divisions of his army and set out to hunt deer, but he could not rein in his horse, so the king lost the divisions of his army and ended up somewhere else. Separated from his army, his body tired and aching, he entered the forest and sat down.
$779 “In that forest a certain kinnara and kinnarī were playing the lute, enjoying themselves, and coupling. When he saw them the king immediately fixated on the kinnarī. Under the sway of lust he impaled the kinnara with a poisonous arrow, and the kinnara died on the spot. Having slain the kinnara, the king approached the kinnarī and said, ‘Come with me, my dear. Let the two of us enjoy ourselves.’
$780 “The kinnarī said, ‘How can I enjoy myself with you when the dead body of my husband lies impaled before me? Let me venerate his relics for some time first. After that I’ll do as you wish.’ She gathered wood, placed the relics of the kinnara on the pile, lit the fire, and took a seat at one side. As the wood for the funeral pyre began to blaze, the kinnarī leapt into the fire and died.
$781 “Thereupon the king recited the following verse out of despair:
“ ‘While I focused on another task Things went wrong, so now she’s gone. I fantasized about the kinnarī, And now I’ve killed two beings.’
$782 “O monks, what do you think? I was that kinnara then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. [34.a] The one who was the kinnarī then is none other than Yaśodharā. At that time she sacrificed her life for me, and now she has tried to cast away her life for me as well.”
$783 This concludes Part Seven of The Hundred Deeds.
$784 1. The Story of Pūrṇa 2. The Sacrifice 3. The Lazy Man 4. A Story about Anāthapiṇḍada 5. The Humble One 6. Padmottama: Two Stories#179 7. The Story of Sudarśana 8. The Story of Ratnaśikhin#180 9. Wealth 10. The Story of Vijaya#181
The Story of Pūrṇa
$785 When the Blessed One was in in Rājagṛha, in a remote mountain village in a valley to the south there lived a certain great, high brahmin. He was prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. He had a loving nature, was compassionate, loved beings like a parent loves their child, and cared deeply for all beings. His name was Pūrṇa.
$786 He would assemble all the householders, renunciants, and beggars, and give gifts to them. From time to time he would set up a site for a sacrifice and perform a sacrifice. When the time came to perform the sacrifice, he would examine the doctrines of all the treatises and ponder what kind of view this and that one contained. Once he had them all in his mind, he would reflect on them and consider them deeply until he understood them perfectly.
$787 One day, as the brahmin began to perform his sacrifice, all the teachers gathered at the site of the sacrifice. The brahmin had memorized all these teachers’ scriptures, and as he began to reflect on them, [34.b] he found his mind was ill at ease with different aspects of their views.
$788 One day the lay vow holders of Rājagṛha extolled the virtues of the Buddha in the brahmin’s presence. Now as soon as the brahmin heard them, he wished to see the Blessed One. Soon after that the thought came to him, “Though thousands upon thousands of ascetics and brahmins come and partake of the sacrifice, the Blessed Gautama still has not come. Wouldn’t it be nice if he came and partook of my sacrifice!”
$789 The Blessed One directly apprehended what was in his mind and thought, “This brahmin will pursue unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment with single-minded resolve. He will be instrumental in my acting for the benefit of many.”
$790 So out of compassion for that brahmin, he set out for the remote mountain village, surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks. As the Blessed One was traveling, he thought, “It should appear to the sacrifice master and the others at the sacrifice site as if I am alone,” and he performed a miracle that caused them not to see the rest of the saṅgha of monks. Having performed this miracle, he proceded to the site of the sacrifice.
$791 The brahmin saw the Blessed One from a distance, and when he saw the Blessed One, he called to him, “Blessed One, welcome! This way, Blessed One—if you please. Blessed One, please partake of the sacrifice I have made here at the sacrifice site.”
“Pūrṇa,” the Blessed One replied, “I shall not partake of it until you have filled up my alms bowl with food.”
“As you wish, Blessed Gautama,” said the brahmin. [35.a]
$792 The brahmin took the many good wholesome foods that he had prepared, and began to fill the Blessed One’s alms bowl, but he was unable to fill it completely. In his hubris he thought, “I won’t give back this alms bowl until it is full.” He and his servants continued trying to fill up the Blessed One’s alms bowl with food.
$793 The Blessed One thought, “This is food enough now for a thousand monks,” so he declared that his alms bowl was full. The brahmin was delighted to see that the Blessed One’s alms bowl had been filled and said, “Now that the Blessed One’s alms bowl has been filled, may the Blessed Gautama partake of it happily.”
$794 Out of compassion for the brahmin the Blessed One emanated a thousand monks right there at the sacrifice site. After the water vessels had been filled, the Blessed One took his place at the head of the row and the other monks seated themselves according to their ages. Once the saṅgha of monks was comfortably seated, the servers made their rounds. The brahmin saw all this, and seeing it he felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One, and said, “The ascetic Gautama is a person of great miracles and great power.”
$795 In his joy he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and beseeched him, “Blessed Gautama, please permit me to provide the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick for three months.” The Blessed One assented to him by his silence.
$796 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the brahmin then provided all their necessities there in the garden of Prince Jeta. [35.b] After he had respectfully provided the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with all their necessities for three months, on the last day he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks food of a hundred flavors and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe.
$797 He also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton, and he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$798 Then the Blessed One said to the brahmin, “Very good, brahmin, very good. Brahmin, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Pūrṇa.”
$799 After the Blessed One prophesied that the brahmin would attain unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, he disappeared from the sacrifice site and returned to Bamboo Grove.
The Sacrifice
$800 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī there lived a certain brahmin. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth [36.a] they named him according to their clan.
$801 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up, he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences. He gained perfect comprehension of all the scriptures and defeated all in scriptural debate.
$802 One day both of his parents died and he thought, “In both appearance and learning no one is my equal—where is there anyone better?” Since his parents had performed the sacrifice from time to time, the brahmins said to him, “Child, your parents performed the sacrifice from time to time. You should follow the custom of your father.”
$803 “In both appearance and learning no one is my equal,” the young man replied. “Why then should I give gifts to others?”
As soon as the brahmins heard this they all became very unhappy with him, and they made an agreement among themselves not to associate further with him.#182 He was similarly unhappy with them. “What need do I have to act as patron to such people?” he thought.
$804 One day the Blessed One thought, “This young brahmin will pursue unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment with single-minded resolve.” With this thought the Blessed One disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta and, bursting forth from the floor of the young brahmin’s house, the Blessed One rose into the air, sending forth rays of light [36.b] that gave the house an appearance the color of refined gold.
$805 As soon as the young brahmin saw this he felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he prepared a seat for the Blessed One and requested him, “Blessed One, please have a seat on this cushion I have prepared for you!” The Blessed One seated himself upon the cushion, and after taking his seat, the Blessed One taught the young brahmin a teaching about generosity. After that, the young brahmin felt a strong impulse to perform acts of charity and explained to the Blessed One, “Lord, I wish to give gifts and make merit, but I’m not capable of doing such things.”
$806 The Blessed One uncovered treasures for him, and at the sight of them he was again especially filled with joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he bowed down at the Blessed One’s feet and beseeched him, “Blessed One, please permit me to provide the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick for three months.” The Blessed One assented to him by his silence.
$807 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the young brahmin then set up a site for a sacrifice that reached Śrāvastī and the garden of Prince Jeta. He announced, “I shall perform a sacrifice for all the renunciants of heterodox views. Whoever wishes to do so may partake of the festival and the offerings. Please come to the sacrifice site and partake!”
$808 The brahmins replied, “We shall not partake of a sacrifice for someone who hates the brahmins.”
“If you won’t partake,” said the young brahmin, “then I shall offer the portion allotted to you to the ascetic Gautama and his disciples on your behalf, [37.a] and it is his doctrine’s code of conduct I shall practice.”
$809 Then the brahmins thought, “Since this young brahmin always does as he says, it’s possible he will do just that. If that’s the case our offerings will be forfeited.” So they dissolved the agreement they had made among themselves, went to the site of the sacrifice, and partook.
$810 Then for three months the young brahmin offered many good, wholesome foods to the renunciants of heterodox views, making offerings to them all. On the last day he contented the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with food of a hundred flavors and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe. After that he also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton.
$811 When he noted the major marks of perfection adorning the Blessed One, such as his golden complexion, he prayed to achieve unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$812 Then the Blessed One said to the young brahmin, “Very good, young brahmin, very good. Young brahmin, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Arthadarśin.” Having spoken thus, the Blessed One returned to the monastery.
The Lazy Man
$813 [37.b] When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan. They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake.
$814 The young man was lazier than lazy—once he lay down in bed and couldn’t get back up again. When his parents asked him, “Child, do you have a physical illness, or perhaps some kind of depression?” out of laziness he couldn’t even respond, so his parents took him to a healer.
$815 The healer told them, “He’s not physically ill, nor does he have some kind of depression. He just can’t get up because he’s lazy.”
After that his parents told him over and over again, “Child, don’t be like this. You’ll never find happiness if you stay like this. Human life is sustained by the fruits of one’s abilities.” Though they urged him many times to do so, still they could not get him up.
$816 One day the thought came to his parents, “Let us invite some persons over who are worthy of offerings. Perhaps he will stand when he sees them.” So they invited the six teachers#183 and offered them food. Though the boy saw them, he did not stand.
$817 Then the householder thought, “It’s well known that the ascetic Gautama is a person of merit, and very compelling. If our son sees him, maybe he will decide to stand.” [38.a] So the next day they extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks. After preparing many good, wholesome foods that night, in the morning they rose, prepared seats, filled the water pots, and set them out. Then they sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him it was time for the midday meal: “Lord, the midday meal is upon us. Know that the time has come, Blessed One, and your presence is requested.”
$818 In the morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he set out surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks, until they arrived at the householder’s reception room. There he took his place on the seat prepared for him amid the saṅgha of monks.
$819 The young man saw the Blessed Buddha, resplendent and agreeable, in the distance. His senses were at peace and his mind perfectly tame. He was graced with tranquility, shining and brilliant like a golden pillar. At the sight of him, the young man mustered his strength, stood in respect, and approached the Blessed One. He touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and once he and his parents knew that the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks were comfortably seated, by their own hands they contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished.
$820 When they knew that the Blessed One had finished eating and that his bowl had been taken away and his hands washed, they brought in very low seats and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One spoke in praise of diligence to the young man, saying, “Young man, through diligence one can achieve unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment.” And the young man thought, “This advice the Blessed One has given [38.b] is good indeed. I will not be able to attain the special qualities of the guru with such feeble efforts. I will prepare to set out upon the ocean, and I shall serve the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha with respect.”
$821 So he loaded up his wares and set out on the great ocean. Having set out on the great ocean, he successfully completed a voyage to Ratnadvīpa and returned to Śrāvastī, where he extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks and provided for all their needs for three months.
$822 On the last day he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks food of a hundred flavors, and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe. After that he also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton.
$823 Then he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to show them the way—a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$824 “Very good, brahmin, very good,” the Blessed One said to the young man. “Brahmin, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to show them the way—a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Possessor of the Valor of Strength and Effort.”
A Story about Anāthapiṇḍada
$825 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived [39.a] a certain poor brahmin who had to provide for many and had many servants. He thought, “I will entrust myself to some rich person for my livelihood.” Then he thought, “The householder Anāthapiṇḍada is compassionate, and wants so deeply to perform acts of charity. He will be able to collect for me the things I need.” So he began to follow him about like a shadow, never separating from him.
$826 The householder Anāthapiṇḍada became suspicious and asked him, “Brahmin, why have you attached yourself to me?”
“Householder, I have attached myself to you because I wish to entrust myself to you for my livelihood,” the brahmin replied. When he heard this, the householder Anāthapiṇḍada immediately began to provide for all his needs.
$827 It was the householder Anāthapiṇḍada’s custom to go to the garden of Prince Jeta and sweep every day with a suite of five hundred attendants. So it was that one day the brahmin went with the householder Anāthapiṇḍada to the garden of Prince Jeta. The householder Anāthapiṇḍada had something to do, so he commissioned the brahmin to sweep the garden of Prince Jeta. With that the householder departed, and the brahmin began to sweep the garden of Prince Jeta.
$828 Now the Blessed One thought, “This brahmin will pursue unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment with single-minded resolve.” With this thought the Blessed One performed a miracle by which, however much sweeping the brahmin did, not even the tiniest results would be evident. The brahmin was distracted by his task and as a result was happy all day. Afterward he thought, “I should not go back to Śrāvastī now,” and that night he went to bed down in the garden of Prince Jeta.
$829 The Blessed One told Ānanda, “Ānanda, [39.b] make a place for the brahmin to sleep in the garden of Prince Jeta. Sit with him and answer whatever questions he asks you.” And he further instructed#184 the monks, “Monks, though I have taught that monks should live with their virtues hidden and their sins disclosed, out of compassion for this brahmin whoever has achieved some miraculous powers should display them openly.”
$830 Venerable Ānanda replied, “I shall, Lord.” And Venerable Ānanda then instructed the monks, “Make a place for the brahmin sitting in the garden of Prince Jeta to sleep, then sit with him a while.”
As the brahmin sat there in the garden, different monks began to display their various miraculous powers. Seeing them, the brahmin asked Venerable Ānanda, “Lord Ānanda, who are these people who have such great miracles and great power? What kind of people are they?”
$831 “These are the disciples of the Blessed One,” said Venerable Ānanda.
“If even his disciples are sublime,” the brahmin thought, “what need to speak of what the ascetic Gautama himself must be like.”
$832 Then the Blessed One had a thought about the world: “It would be good for the four great kings to come see me this evening, for Śakra, King of the Gods, to come see me in the middle of the night, and for Sahāṃpati Brahmā to come to see me early in the morning.”
$833 Once the Buddha had this thought the four great kings, Śakra, King of the Gods, and Sahāṃpati Brahmā came to see the Blessed One, accordingly. When he saw them the brahmin asked Venerable Ānanda, “Lord Ānanda, who are these beings?” [40.a]
“These are the four great kings, Śakra, King of the Gods, and Sahāṃpati Brahmā, who have all come to see the Blessed One,” Venerable Ānanda replied.
$834 When he heard this the brahmin experienced a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. He thought, “If there are those who are capable of achieving such a state even as human beings, then I will also become a buddha and appear in the world!” And he thought, “Such a state cannot be attained simply by wishing for it, so I will give gifts, make merit, and pray for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment.” When morning came, he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and departed for Śrāvastī.
$835 The householder Anāthapiṇḍada was on his way to the garden of Prince Jeta with a company of five hundred servants when he saw the brahmin from a distance. When he saw him he called to the brahmin, “Brahmin, did you see anything amazing or wondrous in the garden of Prince Jeta?” The brahmin then related everything to the householder Anāthapiṇḍada.
$836 “Brahmin,” the householder Anāthapiṇḍada asked, “what is your wish, now that you have seen such amazing and wondrous things?”
The brahmin replied, “Though I wish for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, householder, I shall not attain such a state simply by wishing for it. Therefore, I want to give gifts to those who beg, and to make merit.”
$837 Upon hearing this, the householder Anāthapiṇḍada immediately gave a heap of jewels to the brahmin. The brahmin extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks, and for three months provided for all their needs. [40.b] After he had respectfully served all the needs of the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for three months, on the last day he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks food of a hundred flavors and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe. He also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton.
$838 Then he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment: “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to show them the way—a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$839 Then the Blessed One said to the brahmin, “Very good, brahmin, very good. Brahmin, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to show them the way—a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Aśoka .”
The Humble One
$840 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, the householder Anāthapiṇḍada had seven sons in total, each of them named according to their clan. They were reared on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and they flourished like lotuses in a lake.
$841 One day the householder Anāthapiṇḍada thought, “I should introduce these children to a social club, but I should introduce them to one that has faith, not one that has no faith. If I introduce them to one that has no faith, it may influence them to not believe in the Buddha’s doctrine.” So he introduced them to a Buddhist social club. [41.a]
$842 The faithless went about seeking entertainment, roaming the village, and frequenting prostitutes. But the sons of the householder Anāthapiṇḍada rendered special service to their group of lay vow holders and to the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha, and occupied themselves with single-day fasting vows and listening to the Dharma.
$843 There also lived in Śrāvastī a certain young brahmin who was poor and destitute of means, and he thought, “I will join this social club and entrust myself to them for my livelihood.” Wishing to join the group of lay vow holders, he asked them, “How much money do I need to join your group?”
“You may join us for five hundred gold coins,” they said.
$844 “How could I have five hundred gold coins?” said the young brahmin. “Even if I wanted to give you the money you require, I am destitute of means, so I don’t have any such money to offer you.”
The sons of the householder Anāthapiṇḍada replied, “If you have faith in the doctrine of the Blessed Buddha, we’ll give you five hundred gold coins.”
$845 “I know nothing of the ascetic Gautama’s great virtues,” said the young brahmin. “What are the ascetic Gautama’s great virtues?”
The sons of householder Anāthapiṇḍada then extolled the virtues of the Buddha to the young brahmin, and when he heard about them, the young brahmin experienced a surge of joy toward the Buddha. In his joy he said, “I will join your group, and I will take refuge in the Blessed Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha.” The sons of the householder Anāthapiṇḍada heard what he said, and gave him hundreds upon hundreds of gold coins.
$846 In this way the young brahmin joined the group. [41.b] One day the social club decided, “Let’s invite the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks and respectfully serve all their needs for three months.”
Some replied, “We won’t all be able to do just that continuously for three months. So let’s take turns offering them food each day.”
$847 “I am destitute of means,” the brahmin said. “I won’t be able to do that for even a day.”
“Those who aren’t able to offer food to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks should part company with us,” the others replied.
$848 The young brahmin thought, “Whether or not I remain a member later, it would not be right for me to part ways with them right now.” He said, “I will take my turn on the final day. In the meantime, please give to me all your leftovers.”
“As you wish,” the social club members replied.
$849 They extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for three months, and for three months each of them took turns respectfully serving the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with everything they needed. Whatever was left over they gave to the young brahmin. The young brahmin gathered it all together and led others to offer some gold coins, until on the last day he invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks to his house, along with King Prasenajit and the householder Anāthapiṇḍada.
$850 That night, after beautifying the streets and beautifying the city, he prepared many good, wholesome foods, and in the morning he rose, prepared seats, filled the water pots, and set them out. Then he sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him it was time for the midday meal: “Lord, the midday meal is upon us. Know that the time has come, Blessed One, [42.a] and your presence is requested.”
$851 In the morning, the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, set out surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks. When he arrived at the young brahmins’ reception room, he took his place on the seat prepared for him amid the saṅgha of monks. Once the young brahmin knew that the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks were comfortably seated, by his own hand he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished, and offered the finest clothing to the Blessed One.
$852 After that he also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton, and he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to lead them, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$853 The Blessed One said to the brahmin, “Very good, brahmin, very good. Brahmin, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to lead them, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Conciliator.”
Padmottama: Two Stories
The First “Padmottama” Story
$854 When#185 the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, it was King Prasenajit’s custom to go to see the Blessed One three times a day. He would worship him with flowers, burning sticks of incense, [42.b] incense powders, and incense cones, then sit before him to listen to the Dharma.
$855 At that time a lotus bloomed out of season on a pond at a groundskeeper’s residence.#186 The groundskeeper thought, “Three times a day King Prasenajit offers flowers, burning sticks of incense, incense powders, and incense cones to the ascetic Gautama, so I will give this lotus to him,” and he brought the lotus to Śrāvastī.
$856 At that time there was a devotee of Nārāyaṇa performing a sacrifice for all the renunciants of heterodox views, and he saw the man carrying the out-of-season lotus. When he saw him approaching, he called out, “Sir! Please give your lotus to me! I shall use it to make offerings to the blessed deity Nārāyaṇa, and I shall also give five hundred gold coins to you.”
$857 At that time the householder Anāthapiṇḍada was going to see the Blessed One with his five hundred servants. The householder Anāthapiṇḍada heard what the man said, and thought, “This man errs in his judgment. If he wishes to pay such a large sum to offer this to Nārāyaṇa, why don’t I produce a still greater sum and buy it to offer to the Blessed One?” So he said to the groundskeeper, “I’ll give you a thousand gold coins to give the lotus to me.”
When the devotee of Nārāyaṇa heard this, with a feeling of superiority he said, “I shall give you two thousand gold coins!”
$858 Continuing in that way, the two increased their bids up to a hundred thousand gold coins. Then the groundskeeper thought, “If the householder Anāthapiṇḍada would give a hundred thousand gold coins like this for his sake, the ascetic Gautama must be truly great. Why don’t I go and make an offering to the Blessed One myself?” So the gardener told the householder [43.a] Anāthapiṇḍada, “Householder, I have no need for wealth. I will go and offer it to the Blessed One myself.”
$859 As he was carrying the lotus to the garden of Prince Jeta, he caught sight of the Blessed Buddha from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When he saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled him with supreme joy. In joy he approached the Blessed One, and upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and cast the lotus toward him in worship. Then, by the power of the Blessed One, the lotus became like the wheel of a chariot above him, moving when the Blessed One moved, and remaining still when he sat still.
$860 When he witnessed this miracle, the groundskeeper was especially filled with joy toward the Blessed One, and he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to lead them, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$861 The Blessed One said to the groundskeeper, “Very good, my friend, very good. In the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, [43.b] a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Padmottama.”
The Second “Padmottama” Story
$862 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain groundskeeper who saw a lotus growing out of season in a lake. The thought came to him, “Let me offer this to King Prasenajit, that it might become a source of wealth for me,” so he bore it off to the royal palace.
$863 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$864 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, [44.a] shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$865 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$866 The Blessed One thought, “This groundskeeper will pursue unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment with single-minded resolve.” With this in mind, in the morning he donned his lower garment and Dharmaa robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he went for alms in Śrāvastī.
$867 The groundskeeper saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance, and he was overcome with joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he thought, “Forget about King Prasenajit, I’m going to offer worship to the Blessed One myself.” So he tossed the lotus into the sky above the Blessed One, and by the power of the Blessed One the lotus became like the wheel of a chariot above him, moving when the Blessed One moved, and remaining still when he sat still.
$868 Upon witnessing such a miracle the groundskeeper was especially filled with joy toward the Blessed One, and he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to lead them, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha one possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$869 The Blessed One said to the groundskeeper, “Very good, my friend, very good. In the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, [44.b] an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Uttama.”#187
The Story of Sudarśana
$870 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. The householder was of a loving nature, quite compassionate, and equitable in charity. He cared for beings, wanted deeply to perform acts of charity, and regarded persons of any and every type of view equally.
$871 From time to time he performed a great sacrifice and engaged in textual studies of the treatises. When he looked out, he saw that he was getting all of the praise while others were being disparaged, and they were unhappy with him.
$872 One day the householder heard the Blessed One being praised, and he thought, “Since the Blessed One has realized all dharmas, it’s certain he’s omniscient.” And when he heard him being praised, he thought, “How good it would be for the Blessed One to come to the site of my sacrifice!”
$873 Thereupon the Blessed One thought, “I will generate the root of virtue in this householder. He will be instrumental in guiding a great many disciples.” With that thought he disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta and approached the householder’s site of sacrifice.
$874 The householder saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance, and at the sight of him he was filled with joy. Full of such joy, he approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and beseeched him, [45.a] “Please come to the site of my sacrifice. I ask that you please partake,” whereupon the Blessed One assented by his silence. Once the householder knew that the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks were comfortably seated, by his own hand he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished, and sat before them to listen to the Dharma.
$875 The Blessed One spurred him on to achieve unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, and so the householder felt a strong desire for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. He extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for three months, and provided everything they needed. On the last day he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks food of a hundred flavors, and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe.
$876 Then he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without anyone to lead them, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$877 The Blessed One said to the householder, “Very good, householder, very good. Householder, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the [45.b] blessed buddha known as Sudarśana .”
The Story of Ratnaśikhin
$878 When#188 the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain caravan leader who loaded up his wares to set out on the great ocean. Having loaded his wares onto camels, donkeys, and other animals, the trader exited the gates of Śrāvastī out onto the main road. Being a person who put a lot of stock in prognostications, he thought, “If I return happily from the great ocean without mishap, then upon my return after I have successfully completed my voyage, I shall hold a great festival at this gate. All along this highway too I shall hold a great festival.” With that he set out on the great ocean.
$879 After he had completed his journey to Ratnadvīpa, he came ashore from the great ocean and thought, “I set out on the great ocean aboard a great vessel and attained great wealth, so I will perform an exalted veneration of the gods of these shores, and of the deities who dwell upon the ships.” He performed a large sacrifice to the gods of the shore, and then traveled toward Śrāvastī. He made his way through the countryside, and unloaded his wares when he arrived in Śrāvastī. After performing a great sacrifice to the deities of the city gates and of the main road, he began to give gifts and make merit. He heaped up jewels and gave them as gifts to the ascetics, brahmins, carakas, parivrājakas, the bereft, and the hungry.
$880 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, [46.a] keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$881 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$882 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$883 The Blessed One thought, “This trader will pursue unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment with single-minded resolve.” With this in mind, in the morning he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he entered Śrāvastī for alms through that very same gate.
$884 The trader saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance, his body graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of great persons. [46.b] When he saw him he felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he scooped up jewels in his hands and scattered them over the Blessed One, and by the power of the Buddha they became like a canopy above the Blessed One, moving when he moved and remaining still when he sat still.
$885 After witnessing such a miracle the trader was especially filled with joy toward the Blessed One. In such joy he bowed down at the feet of the Blessed One and implored him, “Blessed One, please permit me to provide the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick for three months.” The Blessed One assented to the trader by his silence.
$886 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the trader supplied the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with all their necessities there in the garden of Prince Jeta. After he had respectfully served them with all their necessities for three months, on the last day he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks food of a hundred flavors, and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe.
$887 After that he also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton, and prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without any guide at all, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$888 The Blessed One said to the trader, “Very good, trader, very good. Trader, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind [47.a] who are without a guide, without anyone to show them the way, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Ratnaśikhin.”
Wealth
$889 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī there lived a certain brahmin. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$890 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. As he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination. One day he loaded up his wares and set out on the great ocean only to return after completing his voyage.
$891 In the meantime his father, a householder who served the householder Anāthapiṇḍada, found faith in the Blessed One, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts. One day the householder invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks to his house for three months. By his own hand he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished, and then sat before them to listen to the Dharma. [47.b]
$892 The Blessed One directly apprehended the householder’s thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, the householder and his retinue destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$893 After seeing the truths the householder went again and again to the garden of Prince Jeta to hear the Dharma from the Blessed Buddha. There, again and again his thoughts turned to his son, and he thought, “How nice it would be for him to come here and find faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One, and to receive such teachings as these!”
$894 One day the householder’s son completed his voyage and returned. Upon his arrival he dropped off all the riches in the garden and hurried home to see his parents, but his parents had gone to the garden of Prince Jeta to listen to the Dharma. When he was told that his parents had gone to the garden of Prince Jeta to listen to the Dharma, the householder’s son went there too. When he arrived, thinking, “I shall see my parents,” he saw them sitting before the Blessed One listening to the Dharma. He approached them, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, embraced his parents, and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$895 With the boy seated before him, the Blessed One gave a discourse on generating enthusiasm for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, and as soon as the young man heard it, he felt a strong desire for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment.
After they had heard the Dharma from the Blessed One, the householders returned home with their son.
$896 When they arrived they asked him, “Child, [48.a] what did you bring back for us from out upon the great ocean?”
“I searched for and found very precious jewels,” replied the young man.
“Son, you set out upon the great ocean, undergoing countless thousands of hardships, and the jewels you brought back are very ordinary,” his parents told him. “Just sitting here, with little difficulty, the two of us have found very precious jewels.”
$897 “Well then,” said the young man, “let me see these jewels you found with such little difficulty.” His parents then explained to him in detail all the great virtues they had acquired for themselves, and when he heard about them the young man was especially filled with joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he approached the Blessed One, and upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$898 The Blessed One taught him the Dharma particularly suited to his condition. Then the householder’s son, knowing the Blessed One had completed his discourse, rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested of the Blessed One, “I would like to provide the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for three months with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick. Blessed One, please permit me to do so.” The Blessed One assented to the householder’s son by his silence.
$899 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the householder’s son then supplied the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with all their necessities there in the garden of Prince Jeta. After he had respectfully served them with all their necessities for three months, on the last day he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks food of a hundred flavors, and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe. [48.b] After that he also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton.
$900 Then he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$901 The Blessed One said to the householders’ son, “Very good, householders’ son, very good. Householders’ son, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Jalataraṅga.”
The Story of Vijaya
$902 When#189 the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, the king of North Pañcāla and the king of South Pañcāla did not get along, and from time to time a great many people were killed. King Prasenajit was a beloved friend of both, and he thought, “How can I reconcile these two?” Then the thought came to him, “The Blessed One tames those who have not been tamed. I will put this request before the Blessed One.”
$903 King Prasenajit went to see the Blessed One, and upon his arrival he bowed down at the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side. Then he put this request to the Blessed One: “Lord, the king of North Pañcāla and the king of South Pañcāla [49.a] do not get along, and from time to time a great many people are killed. Since the Blessed One tames those who have not been tamed, I beseech you, out of compassion for them, please strive to purge them of enmity.” The Blessed One assented to King Prasenajit by his silence. King Prasenajit then praised this assurance from the Blessed One, rejoiced, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took leave of him.
$904 The Blessed One disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta and traveled to the border between North and South Pañcāla, where he performed a miracle that caused the kings to feel ineluctably compelled to battle. So the king of North Pañcāla and the king of South Pañcāla arrayed the four divisions of their armies and set out to wage war. As they began waging war, due to the power of the Blessed One neither was able to win. Each had the perception that the other would defeat him, so they both mounted their chariots and went to see the Blessed One.
$905 Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and took seats to one side. The Blessed One performed a miracle so that neither could see the other, and thought, “Of these two, one will go forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. The other will pursue unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment with single-minded resolve.”
$906 To the first he gave a discourse on the four truths of noble beings. To the other he gave a discourse that would spur him on to unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. [49.b] Thereupon the king of South Pañcāla rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$907 With the words “Come, join me, monk!” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship.
$908 Then the king of North Pañcāla rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “For three months I would like to provide the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick. Blessed One, please permit me to do so.” The Blessed One assented to the king of North Pañcāla by his silence.
$909 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the king of North Pañcāla then invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks to his own country. There he respectfully served the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with all their necessities for three months. On the last day he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks food of a hundred flavors, and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe.
$910 After that he also offered each of the other monks a set of robes fashioned from cotton, and [50.a] he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, “By this root of virtue may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.”
$911 The Blessed One said to the king of North Pañcāla, “Very good, great king, very good. Great king, in the future you will be a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—the blessed buddha known as Vijaya .”
$912 This concludes Part Eight of The Hundred Deeds.