$1 1. The Sons 2. The Crevasse 3. The Ransom 4. The Attack 5. Trapped 6. The Partridge 7. Father, or The Story of Sudarśana#190 8. The Bandits 9. The Piśācas 10. The Story of Head of Indra
The Sons
$2 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain brahmin. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan. They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids.
$3 Now desires are like salt water—the more you use to slake your thirst, the more you need. Over time, the brahmin eventually had one, and then two, and so on, up to seven sons. They named them according to their clan, and raised them on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and [50.b] milk solids.
$4 As they grew up they studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, they became masters of the six types of brahminical activities.
$5 One day the brahmin gave his home to his sons, apportioning what wealth was in the house and distributing it among them. Then, after the brahmin’s wife died and the brahmin himself had become old and could no longer see, they threw him out of the house, so he frequented others’ houses, and sustained himself by begging.
$6 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$7 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? [51.a] Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$8 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$9 The Blessed One thought, “The time has now come to tame those brahmins.”#191 In the morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he went for alms in Śrāvastī. As the Blessed One was walking through Śrāvastī, he saw a brahmin, aged and infirm, carrying a walking stick and bowl, begging at the houses of others. The Blessed One spoke to him, saying, “Brahmin, you are aged and infirm. Why is it you carry a walking stick and bowl, and beg at others’ houses?”
$10 “Oh, Gautama,” the brahmin replied, “I had seven sons. I made sure they were cared for and raised well, and that their education was complete. And after I arranged for their marriages,#192 apportioned among them what wealth was in the house, and gave it to them, they threw me out of the house. That’s why I carry a walking stick and bowl, and go about begging at others’ houses.”
$11 The Blessed One asked the brahmin, “Brahmin, would you be able to learn some verses from me, and when you’ve learned them all, to proclaim them to all your sons?”
“Yes, Gautama, I can do that,” [51.b] replied the brahmin.
$12 Thereupon the Blessed One spoke these verses to him:
“Those at whose birth I was happy, For whom I saved up all my wealth, And whose weddings I arranged#193 Have now driven me from home.
$13 “While using up my wealth, They cast me out.#194 Monsters all, parading as sons— Still I have not forgotten their cries of ‘Papa!’#195
$14 “My youth has faded, Like an old horse who’s lost his strength. An aged father of young men, I beg at other’s houses.
$15 “Since my sons are no support, I’ve taken up this stick instead. With its help I fend off cattle and move along,
$16 “Warding off the snakes and dogs, Walking on in darkness, Counting my paces in fear, And when I stumble, it’s my sole support.”
$17 After the brahmin had heard these verses from the Blessed One, he went and related them to his sons. When they heard him, they begged his forgiveness at once and made him master of the house again.
$18 One day the brahmin thought, “Whatever glory and fortune I have is all by the grace of the Blessed Gautama, so I will offer the Blessed Gautama food and very costly robes.” So the brahmin extended an invitation to the Blessed One, offering him many good, wholesome foods, and presenting him with very valuable clothes. Then the Blessed One taught the brahmin and his sons the Dharma particularly suited to them. When they heard it, the brahmin and his sons destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$19 After seeing the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One [52.a] with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$20 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
$21 “Lord,” the monks requested of the Blessed One, “tell us why this brahmin, aged and infirm, was thrown out of his house by his sons, and the Blessed One, possessed of skillful means, restored him to his former condition and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$22 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, this brahmin was thrown out of his house by his sons, and I restored him to his former condition and established him in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Listen well!
$23 “Monks, in times gone by, in the city of Campā there lived a certain householder who over time had seven children. When they had grown and been educated in the eight types of examination, the householder gave his home to his sons, apportioning among them all that he possessed and giving it to them. When the householder had become old and could no longer see, they threw him out of the house, so he gathered up his few things and went to another country.
$24 “At that time there lived in a place devoted to austerities a certain sage, a person of great miracles and great power. [52.b] Seeing the householder nearing his place devoted to austerities, the sage said, ‘Householder, you are aged and infirm. Why are you traveling in a foreign land?’
$25 “The householder related the story to him in detail, whereupon the sage said, ‘Householder, I shall make it so your children venerate and serve you no matter what.’ The sage brought the householder back to his own dwelling and taught the householder’s sons the Dharma particularly suited to them, such that the sons welcomed their father back to the house and restored things to the way they were. To repay his previous kindness, the householder offered food to the sage and went forth in his presence. After he had gone forth in his presence, he generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$26 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was that householder then is none other than this brahmin. Those who were his sons then are none other than his sons today. At that time he was aged and infirm, and thrown out of his house, and I, possessed of skillful means, restored him to his former condition and placed him in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well he is aged and infirm and has been thrown out of his house, and I, possessed of skillful means, have restored him to his former condition and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$27 “He also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life then, his faculties ripened, and now he has been liberated.”
The Crevasse
$28 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain householder. When the time came for him to marry, he took a wife, and as they [53.a] enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth, they named him according to their clan.
$29 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids. As he grew up, he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$30 One day his father had him join social club. The members of this social club would argue among themselves about different views and theories, and when they agreed with what someone said they would commend him. The householder’s son was naturally astute. When he questioned everyone’s philosophical systems, some would answer him. But when they answered, he didn’t accept their various views and considered them untenable and incorrect.
One day a lay vow holder spoke correctly in praise of the Buddha, and as soon as the householder’s son heard this, he said, “I’ve never heard the term buddha before. Who is this one you call Buddha?”
$31 Then the lay vow holder praised the Buddha in a way that particularly appealed to the householder’s son, causing him to feel a strong desire to see the Blessed One. He left everything behind and went to see the Blessed One, and when he arrived he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One taught him the Dharma [53.b] particularly suited to him, and when he heard it the householder’s son felt joy toward the Blessed One. Then the householder’s son, knowing the Blessed One had completed his discourse, rejoiced, praised all that the Blessed One had said, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took leave of him.
$32 One day he was of a mind to give gifts, but he saw there were no possessions at all in his house. The idea came to him to set out on the great ocean. “If I can complete just one crossing to Ratnadvīpa, it will be easy for me to give gifts and make merit,” he thought, so he loaded up his wares and set out on the great ocean in the company of some five hundred merchants.
$33 After he completed his crossing to Ratnadvīpa and was returning to Jambudvīpa, an overpowering gale arose and thrust their great seafaring vessel into a crevasse. As the tides of the great ocean returned, all of the merchants became terrified and cried out, “We’re as good as dead! Our lives are over. Who can console us? Who can save our precious lives?”
$34 “Have no fear, have no fear,” said the captain. “Take refuge in the Blessed Buddha. He will grant us refuge from meeting with misfortune, suffering, and harm.” No sooner had the merchants heard this than they all took refuge in the Buddha, saying, “Lord, Blessed One, if there is nothing past, present, or future that you do not see, know, or directly perceive, then heed us now, Lord, grant us refuge from meeting with misfortune, suffering, and harm! Please save our precious lives!”
$35 At this the Blessed One [54.a] performed a miracle that caused the boat to return back from the crevasse to shore of its own accord. After the merchants had returned to shore, they eventually made their way to Śrāvastī, where they unloaded their wares. After that they went to see the Blessed One. They touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, kissed them, and said, “Look at the difficult task the Blessed One has done for us! He has saved our precious lives.” And they sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$36 The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the captain and the rest of the five hundred merchants destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$37 Having seen the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$38 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. They cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, [54.b] superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$39 “Lord,” the monks requested of the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the five hundred merchants entrusted themselves to the captain, and the Blessed One granted them refuge from fear and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$40 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, all five hundred merchants entrusted themselves to that captain, and I granted them refuge from fear and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Listen well!
$41 “Monks, in times gone by, in the city of Vārāṇasī there lived in a place devoted to austerities a certain sage who had all the five superknowledges, a person of great miracles and great power, whom the inhabitants of Vārāṇasī held in high esteem and revered, and to whom they offered honor and worship.
$42 “One day some five hundred merchants who held the sage in high esteem set out on the great ocean. After they completed their crossing to Ratnadvīpa and were returning to Jambudvīpa, their ship ran aground because of the ocean’s tide. They were terrified, and thinking, ‘There’s no way we’ll survive,’ they began praying to the deities. Then the captain said, ‘What need is there to pray to other deities? It’s to the sage we should go for refuge. He will grant us refuge from meeting with misfortune, suffering, and harm. He will save our precious lives.’ No sooner had [55.a] the five hundred merchants heard this than all took refuge in the sage.
$43 “At this a god who was fond of the sage called out to him, and by means of a miracle the sage pulled all five hundred merchants out of the ocean and set them down in his forest devoted to austerities. The merchants thought, ‘However this happened, the sage is the only reason that we are still alive.’ So they gave gifts and made merit, and went forth in the presence of the sage. After they went forth, they generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$44 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The ones who were the captain and merchants then are none other than these merchants. At that time they entrusted themselves to the captain, and I granted them refuge from fear and placed them in the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Now as well they have entrusted themselves to the captain, and I have granted them refuge from fear and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$45 “They also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all their lives then, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
The Ransom
$46 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. [55.b] The householder’s children were never in good health. All those born died, girls and boys alike.
$47 The householder’s spiritual friend, Venerable Aniruddha, led the householder to take refuge and maintain the fundamental precepts, to give gifts, and to share what he had. One day the householder’s wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. As the householder thought, “How can we ensure that this child will have a long life?” the thought occurred to him, “Noble Aniruddha is renowned as a person of great miracles and merit. If I grant him my son as an attendant, perhaps his power will ensure the boy’s longevity.” So the child’s parents granted him to Venerable Aniruddha.
$48 Every day the child was led into the garden of Prince Jeta, where he was placed in monks’ care, dressed as a monk, and went with the monks for alms. When the child had come into his own, the householder invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks to his house and by his own hand he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. He then offered up much gold and silver in exchange for having kept the boy safe. After the Blessed One had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted the householder with a discourse on the Dharma he rose from his seat and departed.
$49 When the Blessed One had gone, the householder removed the young man’s colorful Dharma robes and dressed him in the clothing and accoutrements of a householder. But as he did so, the householders’ clothing he had on disappeared and the colorful religious robes returned. Finally, unable to have his clothes changed, [56.a] he stayed in monks’ dress and they cared for him all the same. There at home, in the company of five hundred friends of the same age, they educated him in letters and composition.
$50 The householder’s son was unhappy at home, needless to speak of elsewhere. He wished only to return to the monastery, so the householder brought him to the monastery and he was raised there. After he had realized all the scriptures there in the monastery, he still had no desire to return home. He manifested the resultant state of stream entry there in the monastery. After seeing the truths, he asked for his parents’ permission and went forth in the presence of Venerable Aniruddha, who conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship.
$51 After achieving arhatship, he wondered, “Whom might I tame?” He looked out, and he saw that he could tame his parents, as well as his five hundred friends of the same age. So he disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta, and right there in front of his parents burst forth from the floor of their house. Upon seeing this, his parents felt a surge of joy toward him, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$52 He directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. When they heard it, his parents destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat. Once they saw the truths, he inspired them to go for refuge, established them in the fundamental precepts, and encouraged them to give gifts and to share what they had, until their home became like an open well for those in need. [56.b] After that he led his five hundred friends of the same age to go for refuge and established them in the fundamental precepts.
$53 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “what action did the householder’s son take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship; and that by entrusting themselves to him both his parents and his friends of the same age saw the truths, and likewise pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$54 “Lord, where did they make these prayers?”
“Monks,” recounted the Blessed One, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, the blessed one, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there lived a certain householder in the city of Vārāṇasī.
$55 “One day a child was born to him who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. When he grew up he found faith in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts. On the day he was born five hundred children were born to other householders as well. When they had grown and been educated in the eight types of examination, each of their parents had them join a social club.
$56 “One day in the spring [57.a] the social club wished to go out into the gardens, where the tree branches had thickened and the flowers were in bloom. The young man’s friends of the same age wished to send him on ahead, so they told him, ‘You run on ahead to prepare the food and drink, and we’ll follow after we finish some work here.’ So he went on ahead and prepared many good, wholesome foods.
$57 “As the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and his disciples were passing through the area on their way for alms in Vārāṇasī, the boy saw the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and his disciples from a distance. Upon seeing him he thought, ‘One so supremely worthy of offerings, traveling about for alms! I could prepare food and drink for him with little difficulty. I will offer a meal to the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and his disciples first. After that I shall prepare my friends’ food and drink.’
$58 “With this thought he invited the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and his disciples into the garden, and after he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished, he sat before them to listen to the Dharma. After the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a discourse on the Dharma he rose from his seat and departed.
$59 “The young man then began to prepare other food and drink for his social club. The social club arrived in the garden and heard him say, ‘I offered all the food and drink that was prepared for us to the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and his disciples.’ [57.b] As soon as they heard this, they began to seethe with anger, and in their anger prepared to kill the young man.
$60 “The young man was terrified, so he fled to Ṛṣivadana where he begged his parents, ‘Mother, Father, please pacify this quarrel!’ They were unable to do so, so the young man asked for his parents’ permission and went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Having gone forth, he studied the Tripiṭaka and became a proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of his wisdom and freedom. He led his parents to go for refuge and maintain the fundamental precepts, to give gifts, and to share what they had.
$61 “When the social club saw that he had gone forth they experienced regret and thought, ‘We have done something wrong.’ They bowed down at his feet, asked his forgiveness, went for refuge, and received the fundamental precepts from him.
$62 “One day the monk fell ill. He was treated with medicinal roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and fruits, but he could not be cured. At the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$63 “His parents and his social club sat before him, and when they heard him they [58.a] too began to pray, ‘Entrusting ourselves to you alone, may we too please and not displease the Blessed One.’
$64 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that monk and Tripiṭaka master then is none other than this householder’s son. The ones who were his parents then are none other than his parents now. The ones who were in that social club are now his five hundred friends of the same age. The acts of practicing pure conduct all his life and saying that prayer at the time of his death ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$65 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$66 “At that time his parents and the social club also said that prayer, and so it is that now they have pleased me, and not displeased me.”
The Attack
$67 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, two mighty, agile, and ferocious lions lived at the border between Kośala and Magadha. While they stayed there they killed a great many people and cut off all passage along the road so that no one was able to travel by it.
$68 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, [58.b] fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$69 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$70 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$71 The Blessed Buddha saw the time had come to tame the two lions. He spoke to Venerable Ānanda, instructing him, “Ānanda, go and give the message to the monks that the Tathāgata will travel to Magadha. Inform them that those who wish to travel with the Tathāgata should prepare their robes.” [59.a] After having stayed there during the rains, the Blessed One then set out for Rājagṛha, surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks. In going for alms they eventually came to the lions’ forest den. The two lions were ranging about in search of food, and when they happened upon the monks, they prepared to attack.
$72 Out of compassion for them both, the Blessed One took his place in front of them. The lions saw the Blessed One from a distance, and upon seeing him their fury disappeared and they felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. They approached the Blessed One, touched their heads to his feet, and sat gazing at his countenance. Then the Blessed One spoke to them, saying, “My friends, you have taken birth in the lower realms because of your past wrongful ways. Even now you are creating nothing but such causes.
$73 “So it is, my friends: all compounded things are impermanent. All phenomena are selfless. Nirvāṇa is peace.#196 Let your mind be filled with joy at the thought of me, and you may even be released from rebirth in the animal realm.” Having spoken thus, the Blessed One departed.
$74 Upon hearing this Dharma from the Blessed One, the two lions were pleased. Those who take birth in the animal realms are predisposed to feelings of warmth, so when they passed away, filled with joy at the thought of the Blessed One, they took rebirth among the god realms.
$75 Now when young gods and goddesses are born they possess three different types of innate knowledge. They know (1) whence they have died and transmigrated, (2) where they have been born, and (3) why they have taken birth there.
$76 They saw that when they had died as animals, filled with joy at the thought of the Blessed One, they transmigrated and took rebirth as gods. Then they [59.b] thought, “It’s been a whole day since we approached the Blessed One and offered him our respect. This isn’t proper of us. Not a day should pass without our seeing the Blessed One.”
$77 So the young gods who formerly were lions decorated themselves with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones, put on crowns decorated with various types of precious jewels, and perfumed their bodies with saffron, tamala, spṛka, and other herbs. That night they filled the front of their long shirts with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers. Then, appearing amid a great light in the garden of Prince Jeta, they scattered the flowers over the Blessed One, touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
Then the Blessed One taught them the Dharma particularly suited to them, and upon hearing the Dharma they saw the truths. After they had seen the truths they went back to where they belonged.
$78 The monks, having noticed the great rays of light spreading forth from the garden of Prince Jeta, inquired of the Blessed One, “Blessed One, what was this? Last night, did Sahāṃpati Brahmā, or Śakra, King of the Gods—or perhaps the four great kings, or some other young god of great miracles and great power—come to offer respect to the Blessed One?”
$79 “Monks,” the Blessed One told them, “last night it was neither Sahāṃpati Brahmā, nor Śakra, King of the Gods, nor the four great kings, nor some other young god of great miracles and great power who came to see me. Monks, did you see the two lions who attacked us from that deep forest den?”
“Yes, Lord, we saw them,” they replied. [60.a]
$80 The Blessed One then explained, “I taught them the Dharma, and upon hearing the Dharma from me they were pleased, whereupon they died, transmigrated, and took rebirth among the gods. As gods they came to me and I taught them the Dharma. Having heard the Dharma from me they saw the truths, and having seen the truths they went back to where they belonged.”
$81 “Lord,” the monks requested of the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the Blessed One purified the hostility of those two lions and led them to attain the god realms and liberation, dispelling the fears of two countries.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well I purged them of hostility and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges, dispelling the fears of two countries. Listen well!
$82 “Monks, in times gone by, King Brahmadatta reigned in the city of Kāśi, and King Mahendrasena reigned in the city of Videha. The two did not agree with one another, and from time to time a great many people were killed.
“One day they arrayed the four divisions of their armies, and, wishing to wage war, they hunkered down at the border of their two countries. A certain sage who had all the five superknowledges and was a person of great miracles and great power lived in a place devoted to austerities near where they were hunkered down. Out of compassion for both of the kings, he traveled through the sky to sit between them on the border. Upon seeing the sage, their fury disappeared, and instead they were filled with the greatest admiration for the sage. In joy they asked the sage, ‘Sage, what advice can you grant us?’
$83 “The sage said to them, ‘You must purge all your hostility.’
“The two kings replied, [60.b] ‘As you wish, sage,’ and, coming to an agreement, they bowed down at the sage’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. Then the sage taught them the Dharma particularly suited to them, and the kings ceded their thrones to their children, went forth in the presence of that very sage, and generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$84 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were King Brahmadatta of Kāśi and King Mahendrasena of Videha are none other than those two lions. At that time I rid them of hostility and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well I have rid them of hostility and led them to the god realms and liberation.”
$85 “Lord,” the monks inquired, “what action did they take that ripened into their birth as lions? What action did they take that, after they died, they transmigrated and took rebirth among the gods, and that they pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
$86 “Monks,” the Blessed One replied, “it was partly their past actions, and it is partly their present actions as well. What were their past actions? As lay vow holders in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, lacking discernment they spoke in anger to many people, calling them animals. Then, after going for refuge and keeping the fundamental precepts all their lives, at the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’ [61.a]
$87 “O monks, what do you think? The ones who were the lay vow holders then are none other than these lions. The act of calling many people animals ripened into their births as animals. Then they went for refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts, and said that prayer at the time of their deaths.
$88 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me and not displeased me. These were their past actions.
$89 “What are their present actions? As lions, because they were filled with joy at the thought of me, they took birth among the gods. These are their present actions.”
Trapped
$90 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there were certain hunters in the forests of Śrāvastī who had set out many nets, machine traps, and pit traps#197 to hunt deer, and managed to catch a great number of deer. In the morning they rose and went to the forest, and when they saw the deer they had caught, they began to shoot and kill them with arrows, until only a few remained.
$91 At that time the Blessed One was traveling through the region, and the deer and the hunters all saw the Blessed One from a distance. Upon seeing him they experienced a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. In their joy the hunters approached the Blessed One, and upon their arrival they touched their heads to his feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$92 The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, [61.b] taught them the Dharma accordingly, and the hunters manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat. After they saw the truths, they requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$93 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. They cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
Then, filled with joy at the thought of the Blessed One, the deer died, transmigrated, and took rebirth among the gods.
$94 Now when young gods and goddesses are born they possess three different types of innate knowledge. They know (1) whence they have died and transmigrated, (2) where they have been born, and (3) why they have taken birth there.
They saw that when they had died as animals, filled with joy at the thought of the Blessed One, they had transmigrated and taken rebirth as gods. Thereupon they thought, “It’s been a whole day since we went to see the Blessed One. This isn’t proper of us. Not a day should pass without our seeing the Blessed One.”
$95 So the young gods who formerly were animals decorated themselves with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones, put on crowns decorated with various types of precious jewels, and perfumed their bodies with saffron, tamala, spṛka, and other herbs. That night they filled the front of their long shirts with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers, and they approached the Blessed One, scattered the divine flowers over the Blessed One, [62.a] touched their heads to his feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One taught them the Dharma particularly suited to them, and upon hearing the Dharma they saw the truths. Having seen the truths, they went back to where they belonged.
$96 Having noticed the great rays of light spreading forth from the garden of Prince Jeta, the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Blessed One, what was this? Last night, did Sahāṃpati Brahmā, or Śakra, King of the Gods—or perhaps the four great kings, or some other young god of great miracles and great power—come to offer respect to the Blessed One?”
$97 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “last night it was neither Sahāṃpati Brahmā, nor Śakra, King of the Gods, nor the four great kings who came to see me, nor some other young god of great miracles and great power. Monks, did you see the five hundred deer shot and killed with arrows in that deep hollow of the forest?”
“Yes, Blessed One, we saw them,” they replied.
$98 “They died filled with joy at the thought of me, transmigrated, and took rebirth among the gods,” said the Blessed One. “As gods they came to see me and I taught them the Dharma. After they had heard the Dharma from me they saw the truths, and having seen the truths they went back to where they belonged.”
$99 The monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, what actions did the hunters take that ripened into their births as persons of low class? What actions did the deer take that ripened into their births as deer, and that they pleased the Blessed One and did not displease him?”
$100 “All of them went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa,” the Blessed One explained. [62.b] “As monks they were nothing but quarrelsome, and lacking discernment they called many other monks low class. Others among them called them animals. Those who called them animals took rebirth as animals. Those who called them low class were born as persons of low class. After that they practiced pure conduct all their lives, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
The Partridge
$101 Once, as the Blessed One was traveling through the countryside with a saṅgha of 1,250 monks, as well as with five hundred merchants and five hundred beggars, they cleared a path in the forest. After the Blessed One had passed through the forest, a great fire began to blaze there, terrifying many. They shouted, “We’re as good as burned! There’s no way we’ll survive!”
The Blessed One saw that many had become terrified, and he approached the travelers and spoke in verse, saying:
$102 “May the strength of all the buddhas, May the strength possessed by the arhats, May the light of the Buddha-Jewel Make this pathway free from fire.
$103 “May the strength of all the buddhas, May the strength possessed by the arhats, May the light of the Dharma-Jewel Make this pathway free from fire.
$104 “May the strength of all the buddhas, May the strength possessed by the arhats, May the light of the Saṅgha-Jewel Make this pathway free from fire.”
$105 No sooner had the Blessed One spoken these words than the fire subsided. [63.a] The merchants felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One, and in their joy they sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
The Blessed One taught them the Dharma perfectly suited to them, and among the assembled some generated heat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
$106 “Lord,” the monks requested of the Blessed One, “tell us why the Blessed One saved many from perishing in the fire and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well and in the same way, I saved many animals from perishing in a fire and delivered them to safety. Listen well!
$107 “Monks, in times gone by, in a certain forest there lived a great number of birds. In that forest two dry sticks scraped against one another and a fire arose. Those birds [63.b] that were able to, fled. Their eggs, and those birds that were not able to flee, were left behind.
$108 “At that time there was a bodhisattva who had taken birth as a partridge, and from a distance the bodhisattva saw the approach of the blazing fire. He felt compassion for those living beings and thought, ‘If I make no effort to deliver these beings as they face suffering, how can I lead them from saṃsāra?’ So the bodhisattva wet his wings with water, and as he circled in the sky above the great fire, he shook his wings and said in verse:
$109 “ ‘Though they have wings They cannot fly. Though they have feet They cannot run.
$110 “ ‘Their parents, flown away, are gone. Stay put, fire. Stir not.
$111 “ ‘If it is true and a true statement That I have perfectly Cultivated kindness, Then stay put, fire. Stir not.’
$112 “Then Śakra, King of the Gods, saw that the bodhisattva was disheartened and remained there for the benefit of beings. When he saw this he thought, ‘This is the bodhisattva of our own fortunate eon, who is disheartened and remains there for the benefit of beings. I will help him!’ Then Śakra, King of the Gods, let fall a great rain to quell the fire, and rescued all the beings from the threat of fire.
$113 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was the partridge then and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the beings of the forest then are none other than these many persons. At that time I rescued them from the threat of fire and delivered them to safety. Now as well I have rescued them from the threat of fire [64.a] and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$114 “They also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Some became monks. Some became lay vow holders. After practicing pure conduct all their lives then, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
Father, or The Story of Sudarśana
$115 When#198 the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, there lived a certain householder named Dhanika. He was prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s.
$116 When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with glowing, golden skin and a well-rounded head, long arms, a broad brow, a fine and prominent nose, and eyebrows that met.
$117 When the great crowd of people saw him just after he was born he was beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” and they named him, saying, “Since when the great crowd of people saw him just after his birth he was beautiful, his name will be Sudarśana.” They reared young Sudarśana on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and his fame spread throughout Rājagṛha.
$118 After the Blessed One achieved unexcelled wisdom he began to act for the benefit of those to be tamed and came to Rājagṛha. He stayed in Bamboo Grove, [64.b] where he inspired thousands to go for refuge and take the fundamental precepts. From time to time, group after group and elder after elder, one joyful group after another, gathered and went to see the Blessed One. No one came to see young Sudarśana anymore, so one day he asked his parents, “Why is it that many people came to see me before, but no one comes to see me now?”
“Now they go to see the Blessed One,” they replied.
$119 “Who is this Blessed One?” asked the young man.
His parents praised the Blessed One, and as soon as he heard this, he was filled with wonder and thought, “How could he be more pleasing to the eye than I?” Then he said to his parents, “Mother, Father, I wish to go see the Blessed One.”
“Child, we’ll go with you,” his parents replied.
$120 The parents took their child to Bamboo Grove, where the child saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When he saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled him with supreme joy, and he believed himself to be looking at his father.
$121 He cried out, “Father! Father!” and approached the Blessed One. Upon his arrival he touched his head to the feet of the Blessed One, and, believing the Blessed One to be his father, sat at the Blessed One’s feet. His parents likewise touched their heads to the feet of the Blessed One and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. [65.a] The Blessed One taught them the Dharma particularly suited to their condition, then sat without speaking.
$122 Knowing that the Blessed One had completed his discourse, the householder Dhanika and his wife then took their son by the hand and prepared to depart, saying, “We are going to go now.” But the young man could not be parted from the Blessed One.
$123 His parents thought, “We can get him home by inviting the Blessed One to our house.” They bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together and requested the Blessed One, “Please permit us to invite the Blessed One to take a meal at our house for seven days,” and the Blessed One assented by his silence.
$124 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the householder said to his wife, “Sweet one, go and prepare food for the Blessed One. The boy and I shall stay with the Blessed One here.” The householder and his child slept that night in Bamboo Grove.#199 After preparing many good, wholesome foods that night, in the morning the woman rose, prepared seats, filled the water pots, and set them out. Then she sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him it was time for the midday meal: “Lord, the midday meal is upon us. Know that the time has come, Blessed One, and your presence is requested.”
$125 In the morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he set out surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks. They arrived at the householders’ reception room, where the Blessed One took his place on the seat prepared for him amid the saṅgha of monks. [65.b] Once the householder knew that the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks were comfortably seated, by his own hand he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. Once he knew that the Blessed One had finished eating and that his bowl had been taken away and his hands washed, he brought in a very low seat and sat before the Blessed One and his suite of attendants to listen to the Dharma.
$126 The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the householder and his retinue destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$127 After seeing the truths, the child asked for his parents’ permission, then bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together and requested, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$128 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. His state was such that Indra, [66.a] Upendra, and the other gods worshiped and venerated him and addressed him with respect.
$129 The monks remarked to the Blessed One, “Lord, thousands of children have seen the Blessed One, but never has anyone encountered him quite like that.”
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “for five hundred lifetimes this young man was my child. It was on the basis of these habitual tendencies that he encountered me so.”
$130 “Lord,” they inquired, “what action did the young man take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that he was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful; and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$131 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as forty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Krakucchanda was in the world, the totally and the completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda achieved unexcelled wisdom and then traveled to the royal palace known as Śobhāvatī.
$132 At that time, King Śobha had built a monastery for the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda that was complete in every respect, and offered it to the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda. [66.b]
$133 It was King Śobha’s custom to go to the monastery every day with a suite of attendants and sweep. One day as King Śobha was headed to the monastery, some work came up, so the king instructed his eldest son, “Go and sweep the monastery today,” and departed. As the prince and the suite of attendants went to sweep the monastery, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda performed a miracle so that no matter what he did, the prince would not be able to finish sweeping the monastery before nightfall and would bed down there for the night.
$134 As he was bedding down for the night, the prince saw miraculous displays performed by the monks, and he saw that Śakra and Brahmā and the rest had come. As soon as he saw them he experienced a surge of joy toward the Blessed One, and began putting great effort into serving the monks there in the monastery.
$135 He no longer wished to return to the city, so he remained there and served the monks for five thousand years. He progressed in meditative stabilization on love, went for refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life. At the time of his death he prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may I be well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. May I please and not displease a teacher just like this one. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$136 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the prince then is none other than this young man. The act of serving the saṅgha of disciples of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda [67.a] and saying that prayer at the time of his death ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$137 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$138 “The act of contemplating love ripened such that wherever he was born, he was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful.
“He also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life then, his faculties ripened, and now he has been liberated.”
The Bandits
$139 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, some five hundred bandits menacingly dwelt in a certain thicket of sāl trees on the border of Śrāvastī and Rājagṛha. Their presence there meant that a great many people were killed.
One day after many travelers had been robbed, the merchants approached King Prasenajit to inform him, and King Prasenajit’s son, Prince Videha , mustered#200 the four divisions of his army. They went and captured the five hundred bandits alive and brought them before King Prasenajit. He handed the five hundred bandits over to his executioners to be killed, and they led them away to the execution grounds.
$140 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, [67.b] freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$141 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$142 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$143 The Blessed One knew that the time had come to tame the five hundred bandits, so he disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta and traveled to the royal court, where King Prasenajit saw the Blessed One from a distance. He approached the Blessed One, and upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and asked him, [68.a] “Blessed One, why have you come?”
“Great King,” the Blessed One replied, “do not slay these five hundred noble children. Release them instead.”
$144 “If they go forth,” replied the king, “I shall release them.” King Prasenajit brought out the five hundred bandits and presented them to the Buddha. The Blessed One led them to the garden of Prince Jeta and led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. They cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
$145 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why you saved the precious lives of the five hundred bandits and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I saved the lives of all five hundred of these children of good lineage, and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Listen well!
$146 “Monks, it took place in times gone by, during King Mahendrasena’s reign in Videha. One day the king arrayed the four divisions of his army, and as they set out to hunt deer, his five hundred ministers, who wished to harm to the king, thought, ‘Now the king is in our hands. We should kill him while he’s still here.’
$147 “Now, worldly people are surrounded by both enemies and friends.#201 So it was that someone sent word to the king, and no sooner had King Mahendrasena heard about it than he handed over all five hundred ministers to be killed. The executioners led them away. They entered the forest, and as the king ordered, ‘Kill them now!’ [68.b] a certain sage who was living in the forest convinced him to release all five hundred ministers instead. The sage then led them to a place devoted to austerities. After they went forth before him, they generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$148 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the five hundred ministers are none other than these five hundred noble children. At that time I delivered them from being killed, saved their precious lives, and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well I have saved their precious lives and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$149 “They also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all their lives then, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
The Piśācas
$150 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, a thousand piśācas were living at the border between Śrāvastī and Rājagṛha. They cut off all passage and killed many in the countries of Magadha and Kośala.
King Prasenajit dispatched an envoy to King Bimbisāra, asking him, “Did you know that there are a thousand piśācas living at the border between Śrāvastī and Rājagṛha, and that they are doing great harm to our two countries by staying there? Since the Blessed One is residing in your kingdom, it would be appropriate for you to make a request of the Blessed One regarding these piśācas.”
$151 No sooner did King Bimbisāra hear this than he went to see the Blessed One. Upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet [69.a] and took a seat at one side. Once King Bimbisāra had taken a seat at one side, the Blessed One instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a discourse on the Dharma. Once he had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with many discourses on the Dharma, the Blessed One then sat without speaking.
$152 Knowing that the Blessed One had completed his discourse, King Bimbisāra rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and said to the Blessed One, “Lord, the Blessed One has tamed vicious nāgas like Nanda, Upananda , and others besides. You have tamed the vicious yakṣa lord Aṭavika, and others besides. Now at the border between the countries of Magadha and Kośala there lives a great horde of piśācas, and by staying there they are doing harm to many. Blessed One, out of compassion for the horde of piśācas, please tame them.” The Blessed One assented to King Bimbisāra by his silence. Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, King Bimbisāra touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and took leave of him.
$153 The Blessed One saw that the time had come to tame the piśācas so he disappeared from Rājagṛha and traveled to the sāl forest, close to where the piśācas were. The piśācas saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance, and upon seeing him they took on a hideous appearance and charged at the Blessed One with great force. [69.b]
$154 The Blessed One had a thought about the world: “It would be good for the great king Vaiśravaṇa to come see me with the yakṣa Maheśākhya!” No sooner had the Blessed One had this thought than the great king Vaiśravaṇa and the yakṣa Maheśākhya came to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$155 The horde of piśācas, terrified that the great king Vaiśravaṇa and the yakṣa Maheśākhya would do them harm, began to run all about. The Blessed One emanated flames all about them in order to tame them. The piśācas saw there were great flames all about them and that they could not run away, and that it was only peaceful at the feet of the Blessed One. In search of refuge they went to the Blessed One and upon their arrival sat in a circle around him.
$156 “My friends,” the Blessed One said to the piśācas, “you have taken birth in the lower realms, as piśācas, because of your past sins and nonvirtuous actions. Even now you are doing harm to many. When you die and transmigrate, what will be the state of your rebirth? Where will you go?”
“What advice can you grant us?” they asked.
$157 “From this day forth,” the Blessed One instructed them, “give up sinful actions, go for refuge, and maintain the fundamental precepts.”
“As you wish, Blessed One,” the piśācas replied. Then the piśācas went for refuge, took the fundamental precepts, and gave up sinful actions.
$158 The Blessed One taught them the Dharma that was appropriate for them, [70.a] then disappeared from the sāl forest and traveled to Bamboo Grove. The piśācas remained on the unexcelled path, and they gave water to those who were traveling by, and gave them food as well. To those who had lost their way, they showed the way. The people of Kāśi and Kośala were filled with wonder and exclaimed, “The Blessed One tames those who are difficult to tame!”
$159 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the Blessed One has tamed even these demons, leading them to go for refuge and take the fundamental precepts so they would be of benefit to many!”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I turned them away from sinful actions and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Listen well!
$160 “Monks, in times gone by a great horde of piśācas lived in this very place for a long time. By living there, they brought ruin upon the people of the countries of Kāśi and Kośala.
“There was a certain sage living in a place devoted to austerities near the city of Rājagṛha, and after many people had asked the sage to tame the piśācas, the sage tamed the piśācas and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions.
$161 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were that horde of piśācas are none other than these piśācas. At that time I set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Now as well I have turned them away from sinful actions and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions.” [70.b]
The Story of Head of Indra
$162 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, in Vaiśālī there lived a certain archery master named Head of Indra who knew everything there was to know about archery. He trained five hundred Licchavis in archery, and they mastered it and became very powerful.
$163 One day a disagreement arose between the people of Rājagṛha and Vaiśālī, and the people of Rājagṛha arrayed the four divisions of their army and advanced on Vaiśālī to wage war. Master archer Head of Indra heard that Rājagṛha was advancing on them to wage war, and when he heard this he set out with a retinue of five hundred and advanced on the Rājagṛha army to wage war.
$164 As they advanced they massacred many, and the Rājagṛha soldiers fled. Many people of Rājagṛha were slaughtered as they advanced again not twice or thrice but five times. Soon word spread that master archer Head of Indra had shot five thousand men with arrows and killed them all.
$165 So it was that one day the people of Rājagṛha implored the Blessed One, “Lord, Head of Indra is an adversary to those without adversaries, a rival to those without rivals. Lord, he has killed some five thousand men. Blessed One, out of compassion, please tame Head of Indra.” The Blessed One assented to the people of Rājagṛha by his silence. Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the inhabitants of Rājagṛha then took leave of the Blessed One.
$166 The Blessed One disappeared from Rājagṛha and traveled to Vaiśālī, [71.a] where he performed a miracle so that Head of Indra simply did not know archery anymore. This confused him, and he thought, “What’s wrong with me?”#202 Then he heard that the Blessed One, who had been living in Rājagṛha, had come to Vaiśālī, and he thought, “Since the Blessed One is omniscient and all-seeing, he will be able to directly apprehend why I do not know archery anymore.” So he went to see the Blessed One. Upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$167 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, Head of Indra destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$168 After he saw the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested, “Blessed One, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$169 “Head of Indra,” the Blessed One told him, “go announce this to your students. After that it will be easy for you to go forth, complete your novitiate, and achieve full ordination.”
“As you wish, Blessed One,” he replied.
$170 He took leave of the Blessed One and went to Vaiśālī, where he taught the five hundred Licchavis the Dharma in such a way that they too wished to go forth no matter what. [71.b] They then asked for their parents’ permission and went with Head of Indra to see the Blessed One. When they arrived they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$171 The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$172 After they saw the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and also requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$173 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
$174 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the five hundred Licchavis entrusted themselves to Head of Indra, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$175 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I turned Head of Indra and the five hundred Licchavis away from sinful actions and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions. [72.a]
$176 “Monks, in times gone by, King Mahendra reigned in the city of Potalaka. One day the royal queen conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with glowing, golden skin and a well-rounded head, long arms, a broad brow, a fine and prominent nose, and eyebrows that met. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, ‘What name should we give this child?’ and they named him, saying, ‘Since this is Mahendra’s child, his name will be Mahendrasena .’
$177 “They reared young Mahendrasena on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids. As he grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five areas of knowledge.
$178 “He came to see that his father and the five hundred ministers ruled both righteously and unrighteously, and he thought, ‘I will give up the kingdom and go to live in a forest devoted to austerities.’ Reflecting in this way, he asked for his parents’ permission and went to live in the forest.
$179 “One day his [72.b] father died. Upon his death the neighboring kings began to do harm to the country, and the ministers thought, ‘The neighboring kings do us such harm because we have no lord. We must summon the prince so that he can assume the throne.’ With this in mind the chief minister went to see the prince and said to him, ‘Lord, your father has passed away. Please come and assume your father’s kingdom.’
$180 “ ‘If you adopt the path of the ten virtuous actions, then I shall return,’ he replied. With that he led the chief minister to adopt the path of the ten virtuous actions. The chief minister then set all five hundred ministers on the path of the ten virtuous actions, and afterward they summoned the prince and set him on the throne. By returning there, he set all the country’s many inhabitants on the path of the ten virtuous actions.
$181 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that king then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was that chief minister then is none other than Head of Indra. Those who were his ministers then are none other than the five hundred Licchavis. At that time the five hundred ministers entrusted themselves to Head of Indra, and I turned them away from sinful actions and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Now as well they have entrusted themselves to Head of Indra, and I have turned them away from sinful actions and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$182 “They also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all their lives then, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
$183 This concludes Part Nine of The Hundred Deeds.
$184 1. Śakra 2. The King 3. The Hunter 4. The Story of Deluded#203 [73.a] 5. The Brahmin: Three Stories 6. The Story of the Householder Govinda 7. The Quarrel 8. The Nāga (2) 9. Two Stories about King#204 Śibi 10. Kauśāmbī
Śakra
$185 Among the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three it is Śakra, King of the Gods, who reigns over the kingdom of the thirty-three gods. Five signs customarily appear when gods near the time of their death and transmigration: (1) Deities are illuminated from within, but at that time this light dwindles. (2) The clothing and ornaments of the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, as well as the branches of flowers and fruit that adorn their clothing, normally make very pleasant sounds when shaken by the wind, but at that time the sounds become unpleasant. (3) Deities’ clothing is soft to the touch, but at that time their clothing becomes very coarse. (4) No odor can cling to the body of a god, but at that time their bodies begin to reek. (5) Deities’ eyes never close, but at that time their eyes close.
$186 As gods approach the time of their death and transmigration, secondary signs also begin to appear: whereas before no odor could cling to their clothing, their clothing begins to reek; whereas before their garlands of flowers could not wilt, they begin to wilt; a foul smell comes over their bodies; perspiration starts to come from both of their armpits; and as they near death and transmigration, they no longer wish to sit upon their thrones.
$187 So it was that one day the secondary signs began to appear on Śakra, King of the Gods. He noticed the secondary signs coming on, and upon noticing them, was immediately horrified. He thought, “To whom can I go for refuge who could prevent me from dying and transmigrating from my current state?”
The young demigoddess Śacī said, “Kauśika, you should go to Jambudvīpa and ask those among the ascetics and brahmins who are of a virtuous nature how to prevent yourself from dying and transmigrating from your current state. Seek refuge in them.”
$188 No sooner had Śakra, King of the Gods, heard this than he [73.b] and the young demigoddess Śacī disappeared from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and traveled to Jambudvīpa, where they approached the ascetics and brahmins and others and asked, “How can one prevent the death and transmigration of a god?”
$189 “Who are you?” they asked in reply.
“I am Śakra, King of the Gods,” he said.
Overcome with joy and elation they said, “What a great boon for us! Śakra, King of the Gods, has come to see us!” And they went to him for refuge.
$190 In despair, Śakra, King of the Gods thought, “I came here seeking refuge, wishing to ask them a question, and instead they took refuge in me. What need is there to put my question to these ascetics and brahmins now?” and he abandoned the hope he had in them.
$191 Now on that occasion the Bodhisattva was in the Tuṣita Heaven observing the world by means of the four observations, and he addressed all six classes of beings in the desire realms, saying, “Friends, this evening I shall take birth in Jambudvīpa, where I shall satiate living beings with the nectar of immortality. Let those among you who wish for this nectar also take birth in Jambudvīpa. There I shall grant a share of nectar to you.”
$192 Then the Bodhisattva reincarnated in his mother’s womb, and Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, “What need is there for me to offer the ascetics and brahmins my help and respect? This bodhisattva has reincarnated in his mother’s womb. After he is born he will realize the nectar of immortality—let me then offer him my help and respect.” He sent four gods to be the Bodhisattva’s protectors. From time to time he himself [74.a] went to protect the Bodhisattva, and when the Bodhisattva was born it was Śakra himself who gathered him up in his arms.
$193 When the Bodhisattva grew up, became disillusioned with saṃsāra, and began making efforts in renunciation. Śakra also traveled to the Bodhimaṇḍa to protect him. When the Bodhisattva had achieved unexcelled wisdom, tamed a first and then a second group of five, tamed fifty upper-class village boys and the group known as the Good,#205 established Nandā and Nandabalā in the truths, caused Uruvilvā Kāśyapa and Nadī Kāśyapa to go forth, displayed three miracles upon traveling to Gayā, and in Bamboo Grove placed in the truths King Bimbisāra and eighty thousand gods, as well as the brahmins of Magadha and thousands upon thousands of householders, Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, “This is still not a good time for me to ask the Blessed One my question.” After the Blessed One had placed King Bimbisāra in the truths, traveled to Rājagṛha, and accepted Bamboo Grove, he caused Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana to go forth, spreading the doctrine.
$194 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night. [74.b]
$195 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$196 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$197 The Blessed One thought, “I must establish Śakra, King of the Gods, and his suite of eighty thousand attendants in the truths.” With this thought he disappeared from Rājagṛha and traveled to Indra’s cave on Mount Videha, south of Rājagṛha and north of a brahmin village called Mango Forest. As the Blessed One entered into equipoise on the element of fire, Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, “Now the time has come for me to ask the Blessed One my question.”
$198 His suite of eighty thousand divine attendants, the young demigoddess Śacī, and the young gandharva Pañcaśikha all disappeared from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and came to sit upon Mount Videha. Then, by the power of the bodily presence of Śakra, King of the Gods, and that of the other thousands of demigods, great rays of light spread all over Mount Videha.
$199 Śakra, King of the Gods, entered Indra’s cave, [75.a] and upon entering, saw the Blessed One sitting in equipoise on the element of fire. Upon seeing him he thought, “The Blessed Buddha has entered into equipoise on the element of fire—the time has not yet come for me to go to the Blessed One and offer my help and respect.”
$200 For a moment he sat without saying anything, then he said to the young gandharva Pañcaśikha, “Pañcaśikha, child, could you cause the Blessed One to stir? If you do so, it will be easy for us to go to the Blessed One and offer our help and respect.”
“Yes, Kauśika, I believe I could,” Pañcaśikha replied.
$201 Taking up a guitar of beryl, with a suite of five hundred attendants he approached the Blessed One. He bid the Blessed One to stir with verses worthy of the Lord and worthy of the arhats. Then Pañcaśikha returned to Śakra, King of the Gods, and said to him, “The Blessed One stirs, Kauśika. The time has come for you to go see the Blessed One and to offer him your help and respect.”
$202 The Blessed One thought, “Alas, this cave is very narrow, and that god’s suite of attendants is very large. I will perform a miracle that causes Śakra, King of the Gods, and his suite of attendants to be easily accommodated, that they might sit and listen to the Dharma.” Then the Blessed One performed a miracle that caused Indra’s cave to be large and open.
$203 Śakra, King of the Gods, and his suite of eighty thousand divine attendants, the young demigoddess Śacī, and the young gandharva Pañcaśikha all approached the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
Śakra, King of the Gods, shared the story of his previous exploits with the Blessed One, and then asked his question: “Lord, what are the fetters of gods, humans, [75.b] demigods, nāgas, garuḍas, gandharvas, or those with any other kind of bodily form?”
$204 “Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “envy and avarice are what binds the gods, humans, demigods, nāgas, garuḍas, gandharvas, and those with any other kind of bodily form. They don’t think, ‘I should live without resentment, enmity, ill will, strife, reproof, conflict, and contention.’ Instead they live in resentment, enmity, ill will, strife, reproof, conflict, and contention.”
$205 “Lord, so it is,” said Śakra. “It is just as you say. Envy and avarice are what binds the gods, humans, demigods, nāgas, garuḍas, gandharvas, and those with any other kind of bodily forms. They don’t think, ‘I should live without resentment, enmity, ill will, strife, reproof, conflict, and contention.’ Instead they live in resentment, enmity, ill will, strife, reproof, conflict, and contention. I have understood the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
$206 After he heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, Śakra, King of the Gods, praised what the Blessed One said, [76.a] rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One other questions.
“Lord, on what are envy and avarice founded? What is their origin? What are their aspects? Whence are they born? What must be present for envy and avarice to arise? What must be absent for envy and avarice not to arise?”
$207 “Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “envy and avarice are founded on affinity and antipathy. Affinity and antipathy are their origins. Affinity and antipathy are their aspects. They are born from affinity and antipathy. Where there is affinity and antipathy, envy and avarice will arise. Where there is neither affinity nor antipathy, envy and avarice will not arise.”
$208 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra agreed. “Envy and avarice are founded on affinity and antipathy. Affinity and antipathy are their origins. Affinity and antipathy are their aspects. They are born from affinity and antipathy. Where there is affinity and antipathy, envy and avarice will arise. Where there is neither affinity nor antipathy, envy and avarice will not arise. I have understood the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods, heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, he rejoiced and asked the Blessed One other questions.
$209 “Lord, on what are affinity and antipathy founded? What is their origin? What are their aspects? Whence are they born? What must be present for affinity and antipathy to arise? What must be absent for affinity and antipathy not to arise?”
“Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, [76.b] “affinity and antipathy are founded on craving. Craving is their origin. Craving is their aspect. They are born from craving. Where there is craving, affinity and antipathy will arise. Where there is no craving, affinity and antipathy will not arise.”
$210 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra agreed. “Affinity and antipathy are founded on craving. Craving is their origin. Craving is their aspect. They are born from craving. Where there is craving, affinity and antipathy will arise. Where there is no craving, affinity and antipathy will not arise. I have understood the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods, had heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, he praised what the Blessed One said, rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One other questions.
$211 “Lord, on what is craving founded? What is its origin? What are its aspects? Whence is it born? What must be present for craving to arise? What must be absent for craving not to arise?”
“Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “craving is founded on thought construction. Thought construction is its origin. Thought construction is its aspect. It is born from thought construction. Where there is thought construction, craving will arise. Where there is no thought construction, craving will not arise.”
$212 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra agreed. “Craving is founded on thought construction. Thought construction is its origin. Thought construction is its aspect. Of thought construction it is born. Where there is thought construction, craving will arise. Where there is no thought construction, craving will not arise. I have understood the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After [77.a] Śakra, King of the Gods, had heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, he praised what the Blessed One said, rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One other questions.
$213 “Lord, on what is thought construction founded? What is its origin? What are its aspects? Whence is it born? What must be present for thought construction to arise? What must be absent for thought construction not to arise?”
“Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “thought construction is founded on discursive elaboration. Discursive elaboration is its origin. Discursive elaboration is its aspect. It is born from discursive elaboration. Where there is discursive elaboration, thought construction will arise. Where there is no discursive elaboration, thought construction will not arise.
$214 “Kauśika, accordingly, where there is discursive elaboration, thought construction will arise. Where there is thought construction, craving will arise. Where there is craving, affinity and antipathy will arise. Where there is affinity and antipathy, envy and avarice will arise. Where there is envy and avarice, there will be cudgels hefted, weapons taken up, strife, reproof, conflict, contention, cunning, deceit, retribution, lies disseminated, and many such nonvirtuous, sinful things. Thus does this entire great heap of suffering arise.
$215 “Accordingly, where there is no discursive elaboration, thought construction will not arise. Where there is no thought construction, craving will not arise. Where there is no craving, affinity and antipathy will not arise. Where there is neither affinity nor antipathy, envy and avarice will not arise. When there is no envy and avarice, the hefting of cudgels, the taking up of weapons, strife, reproof, war, contention, cunning, deceit, retribution, the dissemination of lies, and any such nonvirtuous, sinful dharmas all will cease. Thus does this entire great heap of suffering cease.”
$216 “Lord, so it is,” Śakra, [77.b] King of the Gods, agreed. “It is just as you say. Thought construction is founded on discursive elaboration. Discursive elaboration is its origin. Discursive elaboration is its aspect. It is born from discursive elaboration. Where there is discursive elaboration, thought construction will arise. Where there is no discursive elaboration, thought construction will not arise. I have understood the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods, had heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, he praised what the Blessed One said, rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One other questions.
$217 “Lord, it is said that there is a path to stopping discursive elaboration. Lord, what is the path to stopping discursive elaboration? What is the path that, if the ordained set out upon it, will stop discursive elaboration?”
“Kauśika,” The Blessed One replied, “the path that stops discursive elaboration is the noble eightfold path, namely, right view, right understanding, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right meditation. This is called the path that stops discursive elaboration. The ordained who enter it are known as those who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration.”
$218 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra, King of the Gods, agreed. “They are known as those who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration. I have understood the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods, had heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, he praised the Blessed One’s words, rejoiced, and asked [78.a] the Blessed One other questions.
$219 “Lord, is there something that is the causal attribute of the prātimokṣa vows taken by the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration?”
“Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “there are six causal attributes of the prātimokṣa vows taken by the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration. They are (1) the forms perceived by the eyes, (2) the sounds perceived by the ears, (3) the smells perceived by the nose, (4) the tastes perceived by the tongue, (5) the tangible objects perceived by the body, and (6) the mental phenomena perceived by the mind.
$220 “Kauśika, I have said, ‘There are two types of forms that are perceived by the eyes—those that are trustworthy and those that are not trustworthy.’ I have said, ‘Any form perceived by the eyes that I have recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to is surely to be abandoned.’ And I have also said, ‘Any form perceived by the eyes that is suitable to adopt and adhere is to be trusted.’ Thus has the Tathāgata taught, knowing when the time is right for clarification on these.
$221 “In the same way, I have also said, ‘There are two types of sounds perceived by the ears, smells perceived by the nose, tastes perceived by the tongue, tangible objects perceived by the body, and phenomena perceived by the mind—those that are trustworthy, and those that are not trustworthy.’ I have also said about these, ‘One should absolutely and surely abandon mental phenomena known by mind that are recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to.’ I have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the right time to teach what should be adopted at any occasion, phenomena known by the mind that are suitable to adopt and adhere to should indeed be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’ ” [78.b]
$222 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra, King of the Gods, agreed. “There are six causal attributes of the prātimokṣa vow taken by the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration. They are (1) the forms perceived by the eyes, (2) the sounds perceived by the ears, (3) the smells perceived by the nose, (4) the tastes perceived by the tongue, (5) the tangible objects perceived by the body, and (6) the phenomena perceived by the mind.
$223 “Regarding those, Lord, you have said, ‘There are two types of forms that are perceived by the eyes—those that are trustworthy and those that are not trustworthy.’ You have said, ‘The forms perceived by the eyes that are recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to are absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’ You have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the right time to teach what should be adopted at any occasion, phenomena known by the mind that are suitable to adopt and adhere to should be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’ The same applies to the others, up to the mental phenomena perceived by the mind.
$224 “This is the meaning of the Tathāgata’s response, as I understand it. You have said, ‘If one trusts some form perceived by the eyes and nonvirtues multiply and virtues diminish, one should no longer trust such forms perceived by the eyes.’ You have also said, ‘If one trusts some form perceived by the eyes and nonvirtues diminish and virtues multiply, one should then trust such forms perceived by the eyes.’ Likewise you said, ‘If one trusts a certain sound perceived by the ears, a smell perceived by the nose, [79.a] a taste perceived by the tongue, a tangible object perceived by the body, or a mental phenomenon perceived by the mind and nonvirtues multiply and virtues diminish, then one should no longer trust such mental phenomena perceived by the mind, nor, likewise, by the others.’ You have also said, ‘If one trusts a certain mental phenomenon perceived by the mind and nonvirtues diminish and virtues multiply, then one should trust such phenomena perceived by the mind.’ I understand the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, have overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, he praised the Blessed One’s words, rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One other questions.
$225 “Lord, what are the things that the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration should abandon? What are the things in which those who have gone forth who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration should exert themselves?”
“Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “there are three things that the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration should abandon, and three things in which they should exert themselves. They concern how one speaks, thinks, and analyzes.#206 As I have said, Kauśika, ‘There are two types of speech—trustworthy and untrustworthy.’ I have said, ‘Utterances that are recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to are absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’ I have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the time to teach what should be adopted on any occasion, utterances that are recognized as suitable to adopt and adhere to are to be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’
$226 “As I have said, Kauśika, ‘There are also two types of thought construction— [79.b] trustworthy and untrustworthy. I have said, ‘Thought constructions and analyses that are unsuitable to be adopted and adhered to are absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’#207 I have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the right time to teach what should be adopted on any occasion, analyses suitable to adopt and adhere to should be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’ ”
$227 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra, King of the Gods, agreed. “There are three things that the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration should abandon, and three things in which they should exert themselves. They concern how one speaks, thinks, and analyzes. Lord, you have said, ‘There are two types of speech—trustworthy and untrustworthy.’ You have said, ‘Utterances that are recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to are absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’ You have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the time to teach what should be adopted on any occasion, utterances that are recognized as suitable to adopt and adhere to are to be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’
$228 “Lord, you have said, ‘There are also two types of thought construction and analysis—trustworthy and untrustworthy.’ You have said, ‘Thought constructions and analyses that are unsuitable to be adopted and adhered to should absolutely and surely be abandoned.’ You have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the right time to teach what should be adopted on any occasion, analyses suitable to adopt and adhere to should be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’
$229 “This is the meaning of the Blessed One’s response, as I understand it. You have said, ‘If one trusts some utterance and nonvirtues [80.a] multiply and virtues diminish, one should no longer trust such utterances.’ You have also said, ‘If one trusts some utterance and nonvirtues diminish and virtues multiply, one should trust such utterances.’ You have said, ‘If one trusts some thought construction and analysis and nonvirtues multiply and virtues diminish, one should no longer trust such thought constructions and analyses.’ You have said, ‘If one trusts some analysis and nonvirtues diminish and virtues multiply, one should trust such analyses.’ I understand the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, have overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods heard the Blessed One’s response to his questions, he praised the Blessed One’s words, rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One another question.
$230 “Lord, how many of these aspects of the bodies of the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration have you said have two aspects themselves?”
“Kauśika,” The Blessed One replied, “I have said, ‘There are three aspects of the bodies of the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration, each of two different types.’ These are the pleasant body, the unpleasant body, and the neutral body. Kauśika, I have said, ‘There are also two types of pleasant body—trustworthy and untrustworthy.’ I have said, ‘The pleasant body that is recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to is absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’ I have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the time to teach what should be adopted on any occasion, the pleasant body that is recognized as suitable to adopt and adhere to [80.b] is to be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’
$231 “Kauśika, I have said, ‘There are also two types of unpleasant body and neutral body—trustworthy and untrustworthy.’
“I have said, ‘The unpleasant body and the neutral body that are recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to are absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’ I have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the time to teach what should be adopted at any occasion, the unpleasant body and the neutral body recognized as suitable to adopt and adhere to are to be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’ ”
$232 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra, King of the Gods, agreed. “Lord, you said, ‘There are three aspects of the bodies of the ordained who have entered the path that stops discursive elaboration, each of two different types. These are the pleasant body, the unpleasant body, and the neutral body.’ Lord, you have said, ‘‘The pleasant body that is recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to is absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’ You have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the time to teach what should be adopted on any occasion, the pleasant body that is recognized as suitable to adopt and adhere to is to be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’
$233 “You have said, ‘There are also two types of unpleasant body and neutral body—trustworthy and untrustworthy.’ You have said, ‘The unpleasant body and neutral body [81.a] that are recognized as unsuitable to adopt and adhere to are absolutely and surely to be abandoned.’ You have also said, ‘Given that the Tathāgata knows the time to teach what should be adopted on any occasion, the unpleasant body and neutral body recognized as suitable to adopt and adhere to are to be adopted by the mindful and vigilantly introspective.’
$234 “This is the meaning of the Blessed One’s response, as I understand it. You have said, ‘If one trusts some pleasant body and nonvirtues multiply and virtues diminish, one should no longer trust such a pleasant body.’ You have also said, ‘If one trusts some pleasant body and nonvirtues diminish and virtues multiply, one should trust such a pleasant body.’ You have said, ‘If one trusts some unpleasant body or neutral body and nonvirtues multiply and virtues diminish, one should no longer trust such an unpleasant body or neutral body.’ You have also said, ‘If one trusts some unpleasant body or neutral body and nonvirtues diminish and virtues multiply, one should trust such an unpleasant body or neutral body.’ I understand the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, have overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods heard the Blessed One’s response to his question, he praised the Blessed One’s words, [81.b] rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One another question.
$235 “Lord, are all beings alike in their desires, cravings, beliefs, and intentions?”
“No, Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “all beings are not alike in their desires, cravings, beliefs, and intentions. Kauśika, beings do not have a single temperament; they have various temperaments. Those who insist that a certain temperament is supreme are utterly convinced of it and act accordingly, thinking, ‘This is the truth. Others are deluded.’
$236 “Kauśika, since it is the case that beings have various different temperaments, then those who insist that a certain temperament is supreme, are utterly convinced of it, and act accordingly should not think, ‘This is the truth. Others are deluded.’ This is because it is on account of beings having various different temperaments that they insist that a certain temperament is supreme, are utterly convinced of it, and act accordingly, thinking, ‘This is the truth. Others are deluded.’
$237 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra, King of the Gods, agreed. “All beings are not alike in their desires, cravings, beliefs, and intentions. Lord, beings have various different temperaments. On this account, they insist that a certain temperament is supreme, are utterly convinced of it, and act accordingly, thinking, ‘This is the truth. Others are deluded.’ I understand the meaning the Blessed One’s words, have overcome my doubt, and have no hesitation.”
After Śakra, King of the Gods, [82.a] had heard the Blessed One’s response to his question, he praised the Blessed One’s words, rejoiced, and asked the Blessed One other questions.
$238 “Lord, tell me—have the ascetics and brahmins all attained the unsurpassed, supreme welfare? Are they all forever free of distorting influences and perfected in their practice of pure conduct?”
“Kauśika,” the Blessed One replied, “the ascetics and brahmins have not all attained the unsurpassed, supreme welfare, nor are they all forever free of distorting influences and perfected in their practice of pure conduct. Only those among the ascetics and brahmins who have exhausted their thirst#208 for unexcelled liberation and whose perfect minds are utterly liberated have attained the unsurpassed, supreme welfare, and are forever free of distorting influences and perfected in their practice of pure conduct.”
$239 “Lord, so it is. It is just as you say,” Śakra, King of the Gods, agreed. “The ascetics and brahmins have not all attained the unsurpassed, supreme welfare, nor are they all forever free of distorting influences and perfected in their practice of pure conduct. Only those among the ascetics and brahmins who have exhausted their thirst for#209 unexcelled liberation and whose perfect minds are utterly liberated have attained the unsurpassed, supreme welfare, and are forever free of distorting influences and perfected in their practice of pure conduct. I understand the meaning of the Blessed One’s words, have overcome my doubt, have no hesitation, and with this thorn removed, I no longer despair. On this account I shall henceforth never give rise to such thoughts again.
$240 “Lord, because of not having gained any understanding before in specific response to my questions, [82.b] after a long time waiting, I have now finally consulted the Blessed One. By means of the words spoken by the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the totally and completely awakened Buddha, the thorn of my doubt and second thoughts has been removed.”
$241 The Blessed One asked him, “Kauśika, do you recall asking such questions of the other ascetics and brahmins?”
Śakra, King of the Gods, replied, “Yes, Lord, I do recall this. At one time the gods gathered and took their seats in the assembly hall of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. They searched for the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the totally and completely awakened Buddha, and not having found the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the totally and completely awakened Buddha, they rose from their seats and went their separate ways, and while the more prominent gods among them remained to search further, the others died, transmigrated, and disappeared.
$242 “Lord, when even those most prominent gods died and transmigrated, I grew panicked and afraid, thinking, ‘Will I too die and transmigrate?’ And wherever I saw ascetics and brahmins living in isolation, thinking that they were the tathāgatas, the arhats, the totally and completely awakened buddhas, I approached them.
$243 “ ‘Who are you?’ they would ask me, and I responded, ‘I am Śakra, King of the Gods.’ Then in joy and gladness they exclaimed, ‘Oh, we have seen Śakra!’ over and over again, and began to ask questions of me, so I did not put my questions to them. They took refuge in me, so I did not take refuge in them.
“From this day forth I am a disciple of the Blessed One. I take my refuge in the Blessed One.
$244 “There’s no end to thought construction.#210 I [83.a] have had so many doubts and qualms. Thus I ranged about so long, In search of the Tathāgata.
$245 “In blindness I have come to serve The perfect Buddha, and since I know not, I have to ask of all the rest The means by which to please him best—
$246 “With what practice, by what path? But no answer do they give at all. Blessed One,#211 you apprehend All my wishes, however small,
$247 “Whatever I think, all I assess, Whence the mind comes, and where it goes. All of us whose minds are known by yours, Each one of us, upon this day—
$248 “Blessed One, arhat, we request You make a statement, give some word. Buddha, awakened teacher, Victor, Māra’s tamer, skillful
$249 “Surgeon for latent afflictions, You who safely arrived, and yet returns To rescue all beings— In this world you are the Buddha,
$250 “And you alone are unsurpassed. Not in all the world nor even Among the gods have you any peer. Great hero, to you I bow.
$251 “Highest of persons, to you I bow. I bow to the one From the Clan of the Sun Who removes the thorn of existence.”
$252 “Kauśika,” the Blessed One asked him, “do you recall ever attaining such a truth, or attaining experiences of such happiness?”
Śakra, King of the Gods, replied, “I recall attaining experiences of happiness. But I can’t recall an experience of attaining the truth. Lord, there was one time when the gods and demigods were waging war on one another, and the gods were victorious and the demigods defeated. Thereupon I thought, ‘Here I am now in the city of the gods. I will gather up all the pleasures of the gods and all the pleasures of the demigods and enjoy them for myself.’ That attainment of happiness came on the heels of war, on the heels of reproof, on the heels of conflict, on the heels of contention. But, Lord, [83.b] the achievement of this happiness—this vision of truth—does not come on the heels of war, nor on the heels of reproof, nor on the heels of conflict, nor on the heels of contention.
$253 “Lord, when I think of the kindness the Blessed One did in bringing me to the Dharma, I think, ‘When I die from here and transmigrate, may I take rebirth in a house equal in fortune to prosperous and wealthy persons of vast and magnificent means with many nice things, belongings, and personal effects; with riches, grain, gold, silver, treasure houses, and multitudes of every type of granary; and with many who are near and dear, friends, siblings, kin, servants both male and female, workers, and others to whom wages are paid.
$254 “ ‘And after I eventually take birth there and my faculties ripen, when I have given gifts and made merit, shaved my head and face, donned the colorful religious robes, and with nothing short of perfect faith gone forth from home to live as a mendicant, Lord, if I am then worthy and receive spiritual instruction, may I practice according to the instruction given. In so doing, if I am worthy, it shall be the end of suffering.’
$255 “And I also think to myself, ‘Should I not receive spiritual instruction, then taking birth in divine form, may my faculties not deteriorate, and my faculties be unimpaired, with all limbs and digits and other parts of the body intact, with a fine complexion, and may I be illuminated from within, travel the sky, and partake of delightful food—blessed with delightful food and a long life free of any who would oppose me.’
$256 “Dead, transmigrated, no longer a god, Now rid of nonhuman life— After I enter the womb, my ignorance gone, May the vows please my mind.
$257 “May I never lack for instruction. Trusting in the way that I’ve been taught, [84.a] Upholding the holy life, May I take up the practice of going for alms.
$258 “And if worthy, when I then receive Spiritual instruction, let my comportment be Just as I have been instructed. This would be my suffering’s end.
$259 “Should it not come to pass, Then when my lifespan, worn out, slips away Let me take birth As a god of Akaniṣṭha.
$260 “Blessed One, I am a stream enterer. Sugata, I am a stream enterer. It is my hope to one day be a once-returner.”
“Very good, Kauśika, very good! The good fortune with which you are blessed The heedful can also achieve.”
$261 Śakra replied:
“That which made me so peaceable, And brought me stream entry as well, Belongs only to you, Blessed One, And only comes from your teaching.
$262 “Its foundation is uncommonly vast— What place is there, then, for another? Anything like it accomplished before, Was not something received from another.
$263 “Lord, as I stand here before you In the form of a god, Please, wise one, I request— Grant that I live long.”
$264 When this Dharma teaching had been explained, Śakra, King of the Gods, and his suite of eighty thousand divine attendants were able to see these things unobscured, with the Dharma vision that has no trace of dust or stain with respect to phenomena. And having seen the truths, Śakra died, transmigrated, and took birth again right where he sat.
$265 The Blessed One knew by touching his body that he had died, transmigrated, and taken rebirth without so much as closing his eyes or disappearing. Śakra, King of the Gods, the young demigoddess Śacī, and the others recognized it too, and the young demigoddess Śacī and the others asked Śakra, King of the Gods, “Kauśika, have you died and taken rebirth?”
“Yes, Śacī,” Śakra replied, “and all of you—I did die, transmigrate, and take rebirth. I acquired an extension of my lifespan right here where I sit.” [84.b]
$266 Now Śakra, King of the Gods, having seen the truths, was jubilant, joyous, and glad. Feeling jubilant, joyous, and glad, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and told the Blessed One, “Lord, I have become a noble one. I am a noble one. As I come to you for refuge, please accept me as a lay vow holder from this day forth for as long as I live, for I am happy to the depths of my heart.”
$267 Thereupon Śakra, King of the Gods, said to the young gandharva Pañcaśikha, “My boy, you are a great help and a delight to me. It was you who first admonished me to go see the Blessed One. Pañcaśikha, when we reach the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, I shall give to you in marriage the one for whom you have hoped and wished for so long—Princess Suprabhā, whom her father, the gandharva king Tumburu, calls ‘sweet one’—and you yourself shall assume the throne of your father, lord of the gandharvas.”
$268 Śakra, King of the Gods, then spoke to the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three: “My friends, just as I previously did to Sahāṃpati Brahmā throughout the three times, henceforth I shall bow to the Blessed One in the ways I had reserved for Brahmā. Why? Because the Blessed One himself is Brahmā. He has become Brahmā. He is peace. He is serenity.”
$269 Śakra, King of the Gods, and the other gods touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, circumambulated the Blessed One three times, and slowly backed away while continuing to bow down toward the Blessed One. And once he was outside the line of sight, Śakra, King of the Gods, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, knelt down on his right knee, [85.a] and said, “I prostrate to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the totally and completely awakened Buddha,” and disappeared on the spot.
$270 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “what action did Śakra, King of the Gods, take that ripened into his becoming a being of great miracles and great power, and such that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him? Blessed One, what action did the eighty thousand gods take that ripened into their entrusting themselves to Śakra alone, and that they pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers.” replied the Blessed One.
$271 “When did they make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as forty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Krakucchanda was in the world, the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda achieved unexcelled wisdom and then traveled to the royal palace known as Śobhāvatī.
$272 “At that time King Śobha built five hundred monasteries with six thousand rooms for the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda and offered them to the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda and the saṅgha of his disciples. And after King Śobha had provided them with everything they required, he and his suite of eighty thousand attendants put great effort into venerating the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda and the saṅgha of his disciples.
$273 “When the totally and completely awakened Buddha [85.b] Krakucchanda had carried out all the activities of a buddha, he passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. King Śobha performed veneration rites for the relics of the Blessed One, built a reliquary stūpa complete in every respect, made a large offering to the stūpa, and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may I take birth as a god, a prominent god, a lord among the gods. Should I take birth as a human, may it be as a prominent human, the lord of a human kingdom.’
$274 “The king’s servants saw him praying, and asked, ‘Deva, what is the prayer you are making?’ whereupon he related it all in detail.
“As soon as they heard this, they venerated the stūpa and themselves prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever we are born, may it be into families of great means, prosperity, and wealth. Entrusting ourselves to our king alone, may we please and not displease a teacher just like this one.’
$275 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was King Śobha then is none other than Śakra, King of the Gods. The act of venerating the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda and the saṅgha of his disciples and saying that prayer ripened into his birth as a god, a prominent god, a lord among gods, and such that when he took rebirth as a human, he became a prominent human, lord of a human kingdom.
$276 “Now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means— [86.a] he has pleased me, and not displeased me.
$277 “Those who were the eighty thousand servants are none other than these eighty thousand gods. The act of venerating the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda and the saṅgha of his disciples, and saying that prayer, ripened such that wherever they were born, it was into families of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that by entrusting themselves to Śakra they pleased me, and did not displease me.”
The King
$278 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain brahmin. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child.
$279 As he grew up, he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences.
$280 One day his parents died. After their death the young man thought, “According to brahminical custom, one may take a wife after practicing pure conduct for forty-eight years. So I will practice pure conduct for forty-eight years.” He practiced pure conduct for forty-eight years and then took a wife. His wife was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. But she was also adulterous [86.b] and lustful. Being with her aged husband did not satisfy her desire, and she looked for another man.
$281 One day she thought, “So long as my husband still lives, I’ll have no opportunity to sleep with another man. I will send him to another land.” She said to the brahmin, “Lord, there’s nothing at all in the house. Why did you make me your wife? Let me go back to my parents’ house. At least there I can get food without much trouble.”
The brahmin said, “Sweet one, don’t be sad. We brahmins can subsist just as well on alms. I will go seek riches in another country, then return.” So he departed, leaving his wife a supply of food.
$282 After he arrived in that other land he came into possession of many gold coins, and as he was carrying them back to Śrāvastī, he was robbed by bandits on the road, and suffered greatly. “If I go home, there will be a great falling out with the brahminī. What a source of livelihood have I relinquished! I’ll just walk into the thick of the forest and die.”
$283 So he walked into the thick of the forest intending to hang himself with a rope from a tree. When he halted there, the Blessed One thought, “This brahmin is acting rashly, for he is to go forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.”
$284 So the Blessed One disappeared from Śrāvastī and traveled to the thick of the forest, where he said to the brahmin, “Brahmin, don’t be rash. I shall give you riches,” and revealed a treasure. “Brahmin, these riches are yours—don’t throw away your precious life.” With those words the Blessed One returned [87.a] to the monastery.
$285 The brahmin returned home bearing riches. The house prospered, and he began to give gifts and make merit. Then the thought occurred to him, “The ascetic Gautama has been beneficial and comforting#212 for me. I will give up living at home to go forth in the presence of the Blessed One.” He gave up household affairs and went to see the Blessed One. Upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and sat at one side to listen to the Dharma.
$286 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, the brahmin destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$287 After seeing the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
With the words “Come, join me, monk!” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. He cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
$288 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why this brahmin, for fear of poverty, was going to kill himself, and the Blessed One presented him with a mountain of riches and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” [87.b] the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, for fear of poverty this brahmin was going to kill himself, and I gave him a mountain of riches and set him on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Listen well!
$289 “Monks, it took place in times gone by, during King Mahendrasena ’s reign in the city of Vārāṇasī. The kingdom was prosperous, flourishing, happy, and well populated. Quarreling and arguments had ceased, there was no fighting or infighting, and there were no robbers, thieves, illness, or famine. Rice, sugarcane, cattle, and buffalo were plentiful. His was a reign in accord with the Dharma. He ruled the kingdom gently and mercifully, as a parent cares for a beloved only child.
$290 “The king was of a loving nature, quite compassionate, loved beings, and delighted in giving. He gave gifts and made merit. He provided for the ascetics, the brahmins, the bereft, and the poor. He prepared a great deal of food and drink and made gifts of it to the creatures who flew through the sky, dwelt in the water, or made their homes in the fields. He set all his people on the path of the ten virtuous actions and promised, ‘From this day forth I shall give all to beings.’
$291 “He ruled the kingdom in accord with the Dharma, so even nonhuman spirits strove to protect and shelter and shield him. From time to time they let fall streams of rain to make the grain crops flourish.
“One of the king’s neighboring kings reigned unrighteously. He tortured the inhabitants of the country, pillorying them and locking them in wooden stocks. The people were continually subjected to heavy taxes, and in their anxiety [88.a] they fled to live in King Mahendrasena ’s country.
$292 “One day, as the neighboring king was traveling about with a great many ministers surveying the countryside, he saw that all the villages, towns, cities, forest settlements, and marketplaces were empty, and he asked the ministers, ‘Ministers, why is it that we have encountered such an empty land?’
$293 “ ‘Deva,’ the ministers replied, ‘ Mahendrasena ’s country is prosperous, flourishing, happy, and has good harvests, and most who live there have hardly any taxes to pay, so many have left to go live there.’ As soon as the neighboring king heard this he seethed with anger, arrayed the four divisions of his army, and advanced on King Mahendrasena ’s country to wage war.
$294 “Now King Mahendrasena heard that the neighboring king, seething, had arrayed the four divisions of his army and advanced on his country to wage war. Hearing this, he instructed his ministers, ‘I don’t dare engage in wrongdoing for just one lifetime’s sake, so if you don’t wish your country ruin, bow down to this neighboring king. I dare not harm him.’ And he said in verse:
$295 “ ‘People concerned about their future lives Would rather live in the woods, clad in tree bark, Eating fruit in the midst of carnivorous beasts Than shackle and kill for the sake of a kingdom.’
$296 “The ministers thought, ‘This king doesn’t dare kill anyone. It’s not right for us all to perish and to suffer over something so pointless. Better that we all leave him behind instead.’ So they left the king behind, allying themselves with the neighboring king. When King Mahendrasena became aware that his ministers had left him behind, he went to live in the forest, and there [88.b] he remained, eating roots and fruit.
$297 “After he had gone, the neighboring king came, assembled the local people, and asked, ‘Where has the king gone?’
“ ‘Deva, he fled,’ the ministers replied. Then the neighboring king brought the country under his control. He divvied up the spoils among the war heroes, laid claim to the kingdom, and remained there.
$298 “Now at that time there lived in a remote mountain village a certain poor brahmin who was destitute of means. Over time he had ever more sons and daughters to feed, and when a famine arose in the land he could not provide for the members of his household. He heard that King Mahendrasena of Vārāṇasī was of a loving nature, quite compassionate, had a love for beings, delighted in giving, and was generous to all. When he heard this he thought, ‘I will seek an audience with him. Perhaps I can get some money from him.’ He went to Vārāṇasī, and there he heard that King Mahendrasena had gone to live in the forest. When the brahmin heard this, he felt greatly worried but thought, ‘If I seek an audience with him there in the forest devoted to austerities, perhaps he’ll bestow riches upon me yet.’
$299 “He traveled to the place where the bodhisattva was living, and approached him. The bodhisattva pleased him with his gentle words, gave him roots and fruit, and asked, ‘Why have you come here?’
“ ‘A famine has struck recently, and I am destitute and unwell,’ said the brahmin. ‘What’s more, I have many children to provide for, and I’m not able to provide for them. I heard that King Mahendrasena gives away all he has, and I thought, “He could be a fountain of riches.” So here I am before you.’
$300 “The bodhisattva said, ‘Did you not hear I’d gone to live in the forest? Where would all my riches be?’ [89.a] No sooner had the brahmin heard this than he went senseless with despair and fell to the ground. The bodhisattva threw water on his face to wake him. When he awoke, the brahmin thought, ‘What’s the use of such a life? I will walk into the thick of the forest and die.’ He took up a rope and walked into the thick of the forest, intending to hang himself with the rope from a tree.
$301 “When he halted there, the bodhisattva saw him, and seeing him so, immediately welled up with compassion and thought, ‘If this brahmin takes me to my enemy, he will be rewarded with a mountain of riches.’ So he said to the brahmin, ‘Brahmin, don’t be rash. I will put an end to your poverty. Come, brahmin—bind me tightly#213 and take me before King So-and-So, and he will give you a mountain of riches.’
“ ‘I could never tie up someone like you,’ the brahmin said.
$302 “ ‘Don’t hesitate,’ said the bodhisattva. ‘Bind me and take me away.’ For he saw no other way.
“ ‘As you wish,’ the brahmin replied. The brahmin bound him tightly and took him to Vārāṇasī, where many people saw and recognized him, but when the people approached the king and informed him, he didn’t believe them. As he was being handed over, the king emerged from the royal palace. He approached the bodhisattva and saw that the brahmin had tightly bound the bodhisattva and brought him there. He asked him, ‘This man—whence did you bring him?’
$303 “ ‘This man,’ he replied, ‘is your enemy, Deva. I overpowered him while he was living in the forest devoted to austerities and brought him here.’
“The king thought, ‘This king’s body is large and powerful, and the brahmin’s body is very weak—how would he have been able to catch him? [89.b] This king is very compassionate, and has love for beings. He must have tied himself up and given himself over to him.’
$304 “Then he said to the brahmin, ‘How did you catch him, brahmin? Tell us the truth.’
“The brahmin told the king everything just as it had been, and as soon as he heard it, the king developed faith and thought, ‘I have done harm to such a pure being!’ He released the bodhisattva immediately, invited him to the royal palace, embraced him, placed him on a lion throne, and restored the crown to him, taking the crown from his own head and placing it on the head of the bodhisattva.
$305 “He said, ‘You are the rightful king! I am not worthy.’ He offered him back the armies and treasure houses, asked his forgiveness, and returned to his own country. Then King Mahendrasena gave the brahmin a mountain of riches and set him on the path of the ten virtuous actions.
$306 “Monks, I am the one who was King Mahendrasena then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was that brahmin then is none other than this brahmin. At that time, for fear of poverty he was going to kill himself, and I presented him a mountain of riches and set him on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Now as well, for fear of poverty he was going to kill himself, and I have presented him with a mountain of riches and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
The Hunter
$307 As the Blessed One was traveling through Magadha, he arrived in Rājagṛha, where he stayed at the Kalandakanivāsa, in Bamboo Grove. At that time Devadatta had repeatedly wronged many inhabitants of Rājagṛha, and those he had wronged expressed their grievances to the Blessed One.
$308 The Blessed One spoke to Venerable Ānanda, [90.a] saying, “Ānanda, go, don your Dharma robes and patched raiment, take any suitable monk as an assistant, and on the streets and thoroughfares of Rājagṛha, and at the crossroads and forks in the roads, tell the brahmins and householders that there is no longer any need for those who have been wronged by Devadatta or those belonging to Devadatta’s faction to express their grievances to the Buddha, Dharma, or Saṅgha. If they say that Devadatta is a person of great miracles and great power, tell them that while previously he did possess great miraculous ability, he has lost it now.”
$309 Ānanda set out, and on the streets and thoroughfares of Rājagṛha, and at the crossroads and forks in the roads he instructed the brahmins and householders that henceforth they were no longer to express their grievances to the Blessed One.
$310 One day the Blessed One fell ill, and the healer Jīvaka offered the Blessed One a medicinal butter called iron arrow. The Blessed One asked the expert healer, “Jīvaka—wondrous?”
“Wondrous, Blessed One,” he replied.
$311 The Blessed One then asked, “Jīvaka—marvelous?”
“Marvelous, Blessed One,” he replied.
$312 The Blessed One then asked, “Jīvaka—you know?”
“Yes, Blessed One, I do,” he replied.
$313 The Blessed One then asked, “Jīvaka—you don’t know?”
“No, Blessed One, I do not,” he replied.
$314 The Blessed One then asked, “What is it that’s wondrous?”
“Blessed One, cows eat grass and drink water, and from them an elixir is obtained from which the medicinal butter called iron arrow is drawn,” he replied.
$315 The Blessed One then asked, “Jīvaka, what is it that’s marvelous?”
“The emergence of the Blessed One in the world, the teaching of the holy Dharma, and the good accomplishments of the Saṅgha,” he replied.
$316 The Blessed One then asked, “What is it you know?”
“Blessed One, I know that whoever is born [90.b] must certainly die,” he replied.
$317 The Blessed One then asked, “Jīvaka, what is it you don’t know?”
“Blessed One, I don’t know who is going where,” he replied.#214
$318 Now all the monks were perplexed, and they requested the Blessed Buddha, who cuts through all doubt, “Lord, tell us why Jīvaka had already realized the intention of the Blessed One’s speech.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, he understood the intention of my speech. Listen well!
$319 “Monks, in times gone by, in a certain mountain village there lived a householder of great means, prosperity, and wealth. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child. For twenty-one days they held an elaborate feast celebrating his birth and named him according to their clan. After that, as they continued enjoying themselves and coupling, another child was born, and again they held an elaborate feast celebrating his birth and named him according to their clan.
$320 “The householder thought, ‘My loans have been paid off and someone to leave my wealth to has been born, so I will load up my wares and go to another country.’ And he thought, ‘My wife is very attractive. If I give her many gold coins before I go, she may enjoy herself and couple with another, so I will give her just a few gold coins before I go.’ He gave her just a few gold coins, and what gold was left he put into jars. He tied the necks of those jars with garlands of pearls and hid them in the cremation ground at the trunk of an aśvakarṇa tree. Then he loaded up his wares and went to another country. [91.a]
$321 “After turning a great profit in the other country he married there as well, and as he stayed on there his new wife gave birth to many children. His former wife, Bracelet, did her best to raise her two sons on what she could earn with her own hands#215 or with a little help from her relatives.#216
“When her sons asked, ‘Where did our father go?’ she told them, ‘He is living in such-and-such a country at such-and-such a place. They say he has a great abundance of wealth. Go there—perhaps he’ll even provide you some small living.’
$322 “So the elder of the two went off to find his father. He wandered about this way and that until in time he came to where his father was. His father recognized his features and called out to him, ‘Where are you from? Where are you going?’ The elder son related everything in detail. His father thought, ‘This is none other than my own son,’ and put him up in his home. He told him, ‘My son, don’t let anyone know I am your father,’ but went on to show him great affection.
$323 “His other sons, suspicious, asked, ‘To whom does this boy belong, Father?’
“ ‘He’s the son of a friend,’ their father replied.
“ ‘He has such deep affection for him,’ they thought. ‘There’s no doubt that’s his own son.’ And they said to one another, ‘That’s our elder brother!’
$324 “Their father thought, ‘Among enemies, there’s none more wicked than a stepmother. I will send him back before she comes to kill him. If I give him even something small, because she is so confrontational, she will kill him on the way. I must send him back!’
$325 “He gave the boy a letter he had written that said, ‘If you dig with great care and skill beneath the karṇa tree—the one that moves quickly from village to village—that is about a yojana east of home, you’ll find the very same inheritance you requested from me. Present Bracelet with what’s around its neck.’ [91.b]
$326 “The boy took the letter and departed. On the way his younger brothers seized him on the road and demanded, ‘What did you get from Father?’
“ ‘I didn’t get anything from him,’ he said. ‘He just gave me this letter.’
“ ‘You see, Father has deceived us,’ they complained. ‘Get out of here!’
$327 “With that they released him, and in time he came to his house. He rested for a bit, and after he had been there for some time, his mother asked, ‘What did you get from your father?’
“ ‘I didn’t get anything from him,’ her son replied, ‘except I did get this letter.’
“ ‘Boy, your father deceived you,’ his mother said, ‘and you’ve got nothing to show for your trouble.’
$328 “ ‘This is a big country. He didn’t cheat me,’ her son said, and he began to examine the letter. ‘ “From village” refers to where he was born. That’s what he means here by “village.” “To village” refers to where he’ll be disposed of, a charnel ground. The “quickly” in “the one that moves quickly” refers to a horse, and the “ karṇa tree” means the aśvakarṇa tree—thus, the letter means “the trunk of the aśvakarṇa tree.” “East of home” means eastward, and “about a yojana away” means exactly that: one yojana away.’
$329 “After analyzing the words in this manner, that night, when no one was about, he went to the charnel ground. Nearby stood the aśvakarṇa tree. Orienting himself to the east, he dug to the depth of a wooden yoke. After a while he discovered a golden jug with a garland of pearls strung around its neck. Elated, he hauled it up, and when he got back home he loosed the garland of pearls and presented it to his mother, Bracelet.
$330 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that householder then. The one who was my son then is none other than Jīvaka. There he understood the intention of my speech. Now as well he has understood the intention of my speech.” [92.a]
$331 Jīvaka thought, “The Blessed One has an adamantine body, and since his body is so large he can’t be cured with just a little medicinal butter.” So he did the calculations, measured out thirty-two ounces of medicinal butter, and offered it for the Blessed One’s body. What was left in the alms bowl he gave to the monks, who thought, “These are the leftovers from the Blessed One’s alms bowl,” and all drank of it.
$332 Devadatta thought, “I will also drink this medicinal butter.” So he asked Jīvaka, “Jīvaka, how much of this medicinal butter did the ascetic Gautama drink?”
“He consumed thirty-two ounces,” said Jīvaka.
$333 Devadatta said, “Then I too will take thirty-two ounces.”
“The Blessed One has an adamantine body, and his body is very large,” Jīvaka replied. “You can’t digest as much medicinal butter as he can.”
“I’ve got an adamantine body too. Why can’t I digest it?” With that he too drank thirty-two ounces of medicinal butter, and while the Blessed One had digested it, Devadatta could not.
$334 The next day Jīvaka again offered the Blessed One the medicinal butter, together with rice soup. Because the Blessed One had taken it, out of pride Devadatta likewise drank the medicinal butter together with the rice soup, but again he could not digest it and was wracked with pain. Stricken with illness all through his vital organs, he suffered the most severe, unbearable, scorching, awful pains, and he could not sleep day or night.
$335 Venerable Ānanda loved his brother,#217 so he brought the news to the Blessed One. The Blessed One reached his hands—which are like mighty elephant trunks, covered with insignias such as wheels, auspicious designs, and swastikas that are the result of hundreds upon hundreds of meritorious deeds [92.b] and provide assurance from all fear—across Vulture Peak Mountain, placed them on Devadatta’s head, and invoked the truth, saying, “By the truth that I hold Devadatta to be neither more nor less than my only son—the good and beautiful Rāhula—may his illness be assuaged.” That invocation of the truth alone instantly cured Devadatta’s illness, and he regained the life that had been drained from him.
$336 He saw the Blessed One’s hand, recognized it, and thought, “This is the ascetic Gautama’s hand.” Though it was by the greatness of the Buddha that his sickness had abated, Devadatta’s arrogance about all his deceit and trickery had smothered and held sway over his thoughts for so long that even now he said, “You have studied medicine well, Siddhārtha. Maybe with that you can finally earn a living.”
$337 The disciples who had gathered there started to spread the word, “Devadatta had fallen severely ill and was going to die, but the Blessed One’s invocation of the truth healed him.” When they heard this, even the members of Devadatta’s faction expressed their admiration for the Blessed One and said, “His love is absolute! How he has cultivated compassion for beings!”
$338 Then the monks said to Devadatta, “The Blessed One healed you, Devadatta. Otherwise you would already be dead.”
“He knows tricks to turn the mind about,” Devadatta said. “That’s how he’s pacifying the whole world.” And he neither repaid his kindness nor felt any love for him.
$339 After he had gone, the monks went to see the Blessed One, and upon their arrival, perplexed, they requested the Blessed Buddha, who cuts through all doubt, “Lord, tell us why Devadatta did not repay your kindness, had no sense of gratitude, and made a waste of what you did.” [93.a]
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, he did not repay my kindness, had no sense of gratitude, and made a waste of what I did. Listen well!
$340 “Monks, it took place in times gone by, during King Mahendrasena’s reign in Videha. At that time in a certain forest there was a well, and into this well five beings fell: a man, a lion, a snake, a mouse, and a hawk. A certain hunter was also in the forest, on the hunt for deer. Stricken with thirst he went to the well, and when the five saw him peeking into the well they immediately cried out, ‘Help us, friend!’
“The hunter felt compassion for them as soon as he saw them, and he thought, ‘If I don’t pull them out, they will all die there,’ so he came bearing a rope and drew them all up out of the well.
$341 “Another day the hunter was out hunting deer, and as he was walking in the forest, the lion, king of beasts, saw him, and asked the hunter, ‘My friend, why are you wandering through this forest?’
“ ‘I’m wandering through here to hunt deer,’ the hunter replied. ‘That’s my livelihood.’
$342 “ ‘Don’t trouble yourself, my friend,’ said the lion. ‘I want to return your favor. If you stay here, every day I shall kill all the good deer and give you as much meat as you like.’ After that, every day the lion, king of beasts, went and killed all the best deer, and brought the man a great deal of meat.
$343 “Another day, the hawk saw the hunter carrying the deer meat home. Recognizing him, the hawk asked the hunter, ‘Do you earn your livelihood by toiling so, my friend?’ [93.b]
“ ‘This is my livelihood,’ replied the hunter. ‘This is what I do to support myself.’
“The hawk thought, ‘This man once saved my life. I need to return the favor,’ and said, ‘My friend, stay here. I shall put your poverty to an end,’ and departed.
$344 “After that the hawk went to the area surrounding the royal palace. He thought, ‘Whatever I get today I’ll carry back and give to him.’ As he was flying through the sky, he saw all the jewelry belonging to the most revered of King Mahendrasena’s queens on the roof of the royal palace, where she had loaded it into a basket. As she sat there washing her hair, the hawk took all the jewelry and brought it to the hunter.
$345 “As the hunter was carrying the jewelry back to his house, the man saw him and asked, ‘My friend, where did you find that?’
“ ‘The hawk gave it to me,’ said the hunter, and he returned to his house.
“Soon after, King Mahendrasena ordered all the bird keepers, ‘Go through all the birds’ nests and bring me back that jewelry.’ When the man heard this, he thought, ‘Even though it’s not quite right of me since that man pulled me from a well twice,#218 I will go and tell the king. Perhaps he will give me a reward.’
$346 “He went to the king and said, ‘So-and-so the hunter has made off with Deva’s jewelry.’ After he heard this King Mahendrasena immediately gave the man a great reward, summoned the hunter, seized the ornaments, and put him in prison.
$347 “While he was in prison, the mouse saw him, and recognized him. He thought, ‘That’s the man who saved my life! I will return the favor,’ and said to him, ‘My friend, for what offense have they put you in prison?’ The man related everything in detail. [94.a]
“ ‘Trust me, my friend’ the mouse said. “Be strong. I shall make sure you don’t lack for food and drink while you’re here.’ So the mouse made sure he did not lack for food and drink while he was in prison.
$348 “Later, while the man was still in prison, the poisonous snake thought, ‘He saved my life. I will return the favor.’ So he said to the man, ‘Listen, man—once I rescue you from this prison, I shall make you a wealthy lord.’ And then he said, ‘I will bite the king with my venom, my venom will render him powerless, and then you should say from your prison cell, “No one else can heal the king, only I can heal him.”
$349 “ ‘When the king summons you, go there, make a circle of cow dung, build a fire, and recite this mantra. I will come when I hear your voice. Then you say, “Either you jump into the fire or take your venom from the king!” And I will say to you, “I will jump in the fire then, for I shall not take my venom from the king!” Then you say, “You have already thrown away your own life, but you will not take the life of our king. It would be dishonorable of you not to take your venom from our king!” Then at your command I will take my venom from the king. The king will then be happy with you, release you from prison, and grant you a mountain of riches.’
$350 “So the poisonous snake went and bit the king with his venom, and it rendered the king powerless. The hunter told the prison guards, ‘No one else can remove this venom from the king, but I can remove the venom from him.’ The prison guards relayed this to the king. [94.b]
“The king summoned the man and said, ‘Listen, man—if you save my life I shall give you a mountain of riches.’ And the man said, ‘Please trust me, Deva. Be strong. As long as I live, you will not pass away.’
$351 “Then the man made a circle of cow dung, built a fire, and recited the mantra. The poisonous snake heard him, approached the circle, and stayed put. Then the man said to him, ‘Here you are! You have two choices—either remove your venom from the king or jump into the fire.’
“The poisonous snake replied, ‘Of the two choices, I will jump, so the king will have to die.’
$352 “The poisonous snake advanced and waited, and to turn him away the man said, ‘You have already thrown away your own life, but you will not take the life of our king. For it would be dishonorable of you not to take your venom from our king.’ No sooner had the poisonous snake heard this than he took his venom from the king. Then the king, in happiness, loaded up a mountain of riches and gave them to the hunter.
$353 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that hunter then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The man who informed the king then#219 is none other than Devadatta. Then, just as now, he did not repay my kindness or have a sense of gratitude, but made a waste of what I did.”
The Story of Deluded
$354 When#220 the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, in Śūrpāraka there lived a certain householder. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child [95.a] who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him Deluded.
$355 They reared young Deluded on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$356 One day his body became completely covered in boils the size of mustard seeds. The boils swelled and burst, and his body became a continuous mass of sores. His father provided the healers with everything they needed for them to cure him, but they were unable to do so, and the worse it got, the more the blood and pus seeped out, until it produced an awful stench. After they covered his whole body with different kinds of fragrant water and draped him with clothes, he healed.
$357 Now when his brothers saw this, they changed his name. They said, “Our little brother healed when we draped him in clothes and ornaments. Therefore, his name will be Covered .” After that some knew him as Deluded and some knew him as Covered.
$358 One day the young man’s parents died, and afterward he helped with all their work, but whatever work he did—whether it was work in the fields,#221 work as a merchant, or work on the boats—something always broke and was incomplete. So the householder Deluded thought, “Whatever work I do here— [95.b] be it work in the fields, work as a merchant, or work on the boats—something always breaks and is incomplete. Is there anything in the world that doesn’t fall to ruin?”
$359 Soon after, the ancestral deity of the householder Deluded ’s friends, acquaintances, brothers, and elders came to the door of his house. When he arrived, the house was bathed in great rays of light, and the deity asked the householder Deluded , “Householder, do you not know which things in this world are subject to ruin, and which are not?”
$360 “No, Deva,” said the householder, “I do not know which things in this world are subject to ruin and which are not. Deva, do you know which things in this world are subject to ruin and which are not?”
“No, householder,” replied the deity. “I also do not know which things in this world are subject to ruin and which are not.”
$361 “Deva, who does know which things in this world are subject to ruin and which are not?” asked the householder.
“Householder, there is one who knows—the ascetic Gautama, the Śākyas’ heir, one of the Śākya clan, who shaved his head and face and donned the colorful religious robes, and with nothing short of perfect faith went forth from home to live as a mendicant, and fully and completely awakened unto unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. He, the Blessed One, knows which things in this world are subject to ruin and which are not,” answered the deity.
$362 “Deva, where is the Blessed One staying now?” asked the householder.
“Householder,” the deity replied, “right now the Blessed One is in the east, in a place called Śrāvastī at the garden of Prince Jeta, in the grove of Anāthapiṇḍada. [96.a] Householder, if you wish, you may go to see the Blessed One and put your question to him. May you then accept whatever proclamation the Blessed One grants you.” After he said that the deity disappeared on the spot.
$363 As soon as the householder Deluded heard this, he was eager to see the Blessed One. One day some merchants from Śūrpāraka loaded up their goods and went to Śrāvastī. When they arrived there, they found faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts. Then they loaded up their goods and earnings and returned to Śūrpāraka, where they spoke in praise of the Buddha and the Dharma in the presence of the householder Deluded . And they said, “The Blessed One is omniscient and all-seeing. Go see him, and he will heal your physical and spiritual ills.”
$364 When he heard their words, he felt especially inspired to go see the Blessed One. So one day the householder Deluded loaded up many provisions, mounted a good horse, and traveled from Śūrpāraka to Śrāvastī. He went as far as he could by vehicle, then descended from his vehicle and approached the Blessed One. When he arrived, he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
Once he had taken a seat at one side, the householder Deluded told the Blessed One, “Lord, this material body has become so weak. I am so ashamed of it. I wish to cast it off. I revile it.”
$365 “Householder,” the Blessed One replied, “this body is like an illness. It is like a series of wounds. It is like an affliction.” [96.b] Using the aggregates as a basis, the Blessed One then taught him the Dharma particularly suited to him. When he heard it, the householder Deluded destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat. After he had seen the truths, he thought, “If my body weren’t like this, I too could go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, in order to ford the floodwaters and completely escape my fetters with diligence, practice, and effort.”
$366 No sooner did the householder feel a sense of renunciation than his body became as smooth as the palm of a hand and free of wounds, and he immediately felt especially filled with joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$367 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and [97.a] discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$368 Venerable Deluded donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, went for alms in Śrāvastī, where a milk cow kicked him, killing him. At death his senses were clear, his appearance pure, and his complexion alabaster.
$369 After that, a group of monks donned their lower garments and Dharma robes, and, carrying their alms bowls, set out toward Śrāvastī for alms. The group of monks who were going to Śrāvastī for alms heard that a milk cow had kicked the householder from Śūrpāraka named Deluded and killed him, and that at his death his senses were clear, his appearance pure, and his complexion alabaster.
$370 Upon hearing this, they took alms in Śrāvastī. And after they had eaten their meal and returned from their afternoon alms round, they put away their alms bowls and Dharma robes, and went to see the Blessed One. When they arrived, they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$371 After they had taken a seat at one side, the group of monks recounted to the Blessed One, “Lord, we monks donned our lower garments and Dharma robes, and, carrying our alms bowls, set out toward Śrāvastī for alms, when we heard that a milk cow kicked the householder named Deluded from Śūrpāraka, precipitating his death, and that at the time of his passing his senses were clear, his appearance pure, and his complexion alabaster. What was his destination? Into what state will he take birth? In what state did he die?”
$372 “Monks,” the Blessed One replied, [97.b] “that noble child is a treasure. The Dharma he came to understand ensued from my own. That noble child attained nirvāṇa. May you therefore perform a reliquary pūjā for his relics.” In that way the Blessed One commended Venerable Deluded as supreme.
$373 After the group of monks heard what the Blessed One had said they took leave of him, venerated the relics, built a reliquary stūpa, and then returned to see the Blessed One. When they arrived, they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and asked him, “Lord, what action did Venerable Deluded take that ripened into his being kicked by a milk cow and killed?”
$374 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “in addition to the actions he committed and accumulated himself, it also happened on account of my prayers. . . .”
Here his backstory should be told in detail according to the tale of Puṣkara.
$375 The monks asked, “Lord, what action did Venerable Deluded take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth? What action did he take that ripened such that his body was a continuous mass of sores; that blood and pus seeped from his body until an awful stench arose; that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship; and that no sooner did he feel a sense of renunciation than his body became smooth and free of wounds?”
$376 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well he committed and accumulated these actions. Since it was he himself who committed and accumulated them, who else would there be to experience them? [98.a]
$377 “Monks, the actions he committed and accumulated did not ripen in the external element of earth. They did not ripen into the element of water, nor the element of fire, nor the element of wind. The actions he committed and accumulated, both virtuous and nonvirtuous, ripened into nothing but his own aggregates, sense bases, and constituent elements.
$378 “When the time arrives—and even if A hundred eons pass— Fruit is born of every act That sentient beings amass.
$379 “Monks, in times gone by, during King Brahmadatta’s reign in the city of Vārāṇasī, there lived in Vārāṇasī two householders who had a certain mutual disagreement. When one of them made offerings of great riches to the king, the other householder criticized him. When King Brahmadatta weighed their case, he ruled against the latter householder in the argument and handed him over to the first, who took him back to his house, lashed him viciously, and sprinkled poisonous powder all over the lash wounds until his flesh was like raw meat. Then his brothers paid a ransom of great riches to the householder, and his body was healed through the advice of a healer.
$380 “One day he became disillusioned with saṃsāra and said, ‘I have had enough of living at home. I will go live in a forest devoted to austerities.’ He gave gifts and made merit and went to live in a forest devoted to austerities. There, with neither a teacher nor oral instruction, he contemplated the thirty-seven wings of enlightenment and manifested the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas. Thereupon he thought, ‘My mind caused that householder to generate great demerit. I will go and be his friend.’ From that very place he traveled through the sky to where the householder was, making a miraculous display of fire and light, rain [98.b] and lightning.
$381 “Ordinary people are quickly brought to faith through miracles. The householder bowed down at the sage’s feet like a tree felled by a saw, saying, ‘Oh great fortunate one, please, please come down! I’m mired in misdeeds! Please reach down and lift me up!’
$382 “Out of compassion for him, the solitary buddha descended to the earth. The householder bowed down at his feet, asked his forgiveness, and said, ‘Noble one, you accept alms, and I seek merit. So I ask you, please stay here in this garden. I shall provide you with everything you need.’ The solitary buddha assented by his silence.
$383 “After that the householder fashioned a hut of branches and leaves for the solitary buddha and began to provide him with everything he needed. One day the solitary buddha thought, ‘I have done what I needed to do with this material body. Let me enter the sphere of peace!’ After reflecting in this way, he made a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning, and passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates.
$384 “The householder venerated his relics, built a reliquary stūpa, made a large offering to his reliquary, and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. May I achieve such great virtues. May the act of harming that other one not return to me. Should the ripening of this action [99.a] come to me before it is exhausted, may I then feel a sense of renunciation. May that misfortune immediately vanish, and may I be fortunate instead.’
$385 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that householder then is none other than Deluded . The act of lashing the body of that other householder and sprinkling him with poisonous powder ripened such that wherever he was born, his body became like this. The act of later paying homage to the solitary buddha and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$386 “Monks, I am more exalted than even one hundred billion solitary buddhas, and he has pleased me, and not displeased me. As soon as he felt a sense of renunciation, his misfortune vanished and he became fortunate instead, and he went forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$387 “He also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life then, his faculties ripened, and now he has been liberated.”
The Brahmin: Three Stories
The First “Brahmin” Story
$388 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain brahmin. As he prepared to perform a sacrifice, the brahmins who had gathered for the sacrifice from various regions thought, “Any sacrifice that gives rise to strife, reproof, conflict, and contention will not succeed.”
One day there was a dispute over the offerings at the site of the sacrifice between the brahmins gathered there from the countryside and those from the center of town. [99.b]
$389 The city brahmins told the country brahmins, “You make your livelihood by working in the fields, so you are not worthy of these offerings. We are qualified to receive offerings. It is we who are worthy of them.”
$390 “You serve to glorify the king,” retorted the country brahmins. “Therefore, you are not qualified to receive offerings. We, however, are qualified. It is we who are worthy of them.”
$391 As they sat there and proceeded to quarrel, argue, and debate each other, one of the brahmins absconded from the ritual offering site carrying a great deal of gold, silver, food, and drink. The other brahmins caught him, pummeled and kicked him brutally, and then left.
$392 Terrified of dying from the beating, that brahmin entered the garden of Prince Jeta. Upon entering he saw the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks sitting without chattering, comporting themselves with elegance and restraint. As soon as he saw them, he felt joy toward the doctrine of the Blessed One. In his joy he thought, “I have had enough of being a brahmin. I will go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.”
$393 He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, and made this request of the Blessed One: “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$394 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. He cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, [100.a] and manifested arhatship.
$395 After achieving arhatship, he wondered, “Whom might I tame?” He looked out and saw that he could tame the lord of the sacrifice and the rest of the many brahmins. So he disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta, and made his way to the site of the sacrifice. The lord of the sacrifice and the other brahmins saw a monk approaching through the sky, and seeing this they felt a surge of joy toward the monk. In their joy they took him into their laps, placed him in his seat, bowed down at his feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$396 Then the monk taught them the Dharma particularly suited to them, and among the brahmins and the lord of the sacrifice some generated heat right where they sat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
$397 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “what action did this brahmin take that ripened into his pleasing the Blessed One, and not displeasing him, and that he went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$398 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, [100.b] the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, a certain brahmin lived in Vārāṇasī.
Continue the account as above.
$399 “After he had gone forth he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$400 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that brahmin then is none other than this brahmin. At that time he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$401 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Second “Brahmin” Story
$402 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain brahmin. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they [101.a] enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child, and they named him according to their clan. They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and when he had grown, he began to study letters.
$403 It was brahminical custom to take a break#222 on the eighth and the fifteenth days of the lunar month—sometimes to visit the city, sometimes to visit the riverbank, or to visit the temple deities, or to collect wood for the holy pyres. So it was that one day, when it came time for the break, the young brahmin went to the garden of Prince Jeta, where the Buddha sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds.
$404 The young brahmin saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance and felt a surge of joy toward him. In his joy he approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One taught him the Dharma particularly suited to his condition, leading him to go for refuge and abide by the fundamental precepts. Knowing that the Blessed One had completed his discourse, he rejoiced, praising all that the Blessed One had said, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took leave of him.
$405 One day the young brahmin began to perform a sacrifice, and, while sitting at the sacrifice site, he thought, “How wonderful it would be for the Blessed One to come to this sacrifice site and partake, adorning the site by sitting at the head of the row.” And then he thought, “O Blessed One, please come to this sacrifice site [101.b] and partake.”
$406 As soon as the young brahmin thought this, the Blessed One disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta and traveled to the sacrifice site. He took his place at the head of the row of brahmins but did not appear to them. The young brahmin, however, saw the Blessed Buddha seated at the head of the row. Seeing him there, once the young brahmin knew that the Blessed One was comfortably seated, he contented him with many good, wholesome foods. The Blessed One partook of the sacrifice without revealing his body, sent forth rays of light to all the brahmins, and then returned to the garden of Prince Jeta.
$407 The brahmins saw the entire sacrifice site completely bathed in a great light, and when they saw this they concluded, “Our sacrifice has been successful.”
“Sahāṃpati Brahmā has come to the sacrifice site,” said some.
“It is not Brahmā but Īśvara who has come to the sacrifice site,” said others.
$408 “It is neither Brahmā nor Īśvara but Viṣṇu who has come to the sacrifice site,” still others declared.
“All of you are deluded,” said the young brahmin. “It was the Blessed One who came to the sacrifice site.” The brahmins did not believe him, so the young brahmin said, “Tomorrow morning I’ll show you.”
$409 The next day, before the entire group of brahmins the young brahmin drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, knelt down on his right knee facing the direction of the garden of Prince Jeta, pressed his palms together, set his intention, and spoke these words: “Lord, Blessed One, [102.a] if there is nothing past, present, or future that you do not see, know, or directly perceive, then, Blessed One, I ask you, please come to this sacrifice site with the saṅgha of monks and partake.”
$410 The very instant he uttered these words, the Blessed One traveled through the sky to the sacrifice site surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks. Then, without revealing his bodily form, he took his place on the seat the brahmins prepared for him. The young brahmin could see the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks seated at the sacrifice site, so he approached the Blessed One, and upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, pleasing the Blessed One.
$411 The brahmins responded by saying, “This young man has gone mad! He is sitting and talking to no one but himself!”
The young brahmin replied, “I have not gone mad. The Blessed One sits at the center of the sacrifice site, along with the saṅgha of monks.”
$412 Right when he said this the brahmins all plainly saw the Blessed One and the saṅgha of his disciples comfortably seated at the center of the sacrifice site. The young brahmin contented the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of his disciples, now visible to the whole world, with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. Once he knew that the Blessed One’s bowl had been taken away and his hands washed, he brought in a very low seat and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. After the Blessed One had instructed, encouraged, inspired, [102.b] and delighted the young brahmin with a discourse on the Dharma, he rose from his seat and departed.
$413 The brahmins were consumed with fury. “He gave to the ascetic Gautama the food and drink prepared for us!” they complained. As they prepared to kill the young brahmin in their anger, he fled to the garden of Prince Jeta. Still the other young brahmins followed him, and when they arrived at the garden of Prince Jeta, they said, “We can’t kill him in the garden of Prince Jeta. Not only does it belong to the householder Anāthapiṇḍada, but King Prasenajit has also issued an edict on this matter.” Realizing this, they turned back.
$414 The young brahmin was terrified, so he went to see the Blessed One. When he arrived, he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, the young brahmin destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$415 After he had seen the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and told the Blessed One, “After I entrusted myself to you, my spiritual friend, the Blessed Buddha, you lifted me up from among the hell beings, animals, and anguished spirits. Leading me to live among the gods and humans, you have brought the cycle of existence to an end, dried up the ocean of blood and tears, led me over the mountain pass of bones, [103.a] destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection to which I have been accustomed since beginningless time, and brought me to manifest the resultant state of stream entry. This is something that neither my father, my mother, the king, the gods, my relatives, my many friends, my ancestors before me, nor the ascetics and the brahmins could do for me.
$416 “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. He cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
$417 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why, as the brahmins were going to kill that young brahmin, in terror he went forth, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, as these same brahmins were going to kill the young brahmin, in terror he went forth, and thus practiced the holy life all his life. Listen well!
$418 “Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa [103.b] was in the world, there lived a certain brahmin in Vārāṇasī.
“When the time came for him to marry, he took a wife, and though they enjoyed themselves and coupled, they had neither a daughter nor a son.
$419 “One day he sat brooding with his cheek resting on his open palm, thinking, ‘Since I have riches and gold, but neither daughter nor son, after I die all I have will become property of the king. It’s just not right to be without children in this world.’ Then he vowed, ‘If I have an heir, I shall perform a sacrifice, and I shall make many offerings to the brahmins.’ Hoping for the birth of an heir, he wished, ‘May my heir be conceived today or tomorrow.’ But the brahmin grew old thinking this, and had neither daughter nor son.
$420 “At a certain point the brahmin thought, ‘I have neither daughter nor son. I have given no gifts, and now I am old. Therefore, I will give gifts and make merit, regardless of whether we bear a child.’
$421 “So it was that one day he performed a sacrifice and made many offerings to the brahmins. As the offerings were distributed a great quarrel arose, and the lord of the sacrifice shouted, ‘Stop your quarreling!’ Then he thought, ‘The brahmins are going to attack and kill me,’ and in terror he went to Ṛṣivadana and went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.
$422 “Once he had gone forth, he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. [104.a] Therefore may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$423 “Monks, the one who was that brahmin then is none other than this young brahmin. At that time, as the brahmins were going to kill him, in terror he went forth, practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$424 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, and not displeased me, and that even now, as the brahmins were going to kill him, in terror he has gone forth, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Third “Brahmin” Story
$425 When the Blessed One was in in Śrāvastī there lived a certain brahmin who performed ritual sacrifice and offered a great deal of gold and silver to the brahmins. As they were distributing the offerings, a great quarrel arose, to which the brahmins from the countryside responded by saying, “You serve to glorify the king. We [104.b] are qualified to receive these offerings. It is we who are worthy of them. Therefore, we deserve double.”
The brahmins from the center of town said, “You pursue your livelihood by working in the fields. We are qualified to receive these offerings. It is we who are worthy of them. Therefore, we deserve double.”
$426 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$427 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$428 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. [105.a] But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$429 The Blessed One saw the time had come to tame the brahmins of Śrāvastī, so he traveled through the sky to the sacrifice site, surrounded by a group of monks and preceded by the saṅgha of monks, where he took his place amid the saṅgha of monks. The brahmins immediately experienced a surge of joy toward the Blessed One, and in their joy sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
The Blessed One said to the brahmins, “Friends, as a root cause, quarreling becomes the basis for five types of dire consequence, so what is the point of arguing?”
$430 Then the Blessed One taught the Dharma particularly suited to them, taking as his point of departure the casting away of their particular attachments. Among the many hundreds of brahmins, some generated heat right where they sat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha. [105.b] With this accomplished, the Blessed One returned to the monastery.
$431 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “what action did the brahmins take that ripened into some of them pleasing the Blessed One, and not displeasing him, and that some of them went forth, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$432 The Blessed One replied, “Some had been lay vow holders in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. At that time some went forth, took refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts. As a result, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
The Story of the Householder Govinda
$433 As the Blessed One was traveling through Magadha, he was accompanied by a saṅgha of numerous monks including the thousand monks who had all previously been the matted-hair ascetics. They were also all arhats who had exhausted the outflows, done what was before them, carried out their activities, subsequently fulfilled their ambitions, completely eradicated that which bound them to saṃsāra, and with right cognition#223 liberated their minds.
$434 They made their way with him across the breadth of Forest of Reeds, proceeding directly to the stūpa of the Magadha people called Very Steady. As they arrived at the stūpa Very Steady, the Blessed One seated himself at the base of the stūpa.
$435 Bimbisāra, the king of Magadha, heard that the Blessed One and a saṅgha of numerous monks including the thousand monks had made their way across the country to arrive at the Magadha stūpa called Very Steady, near Forest of Reeds. [106.a] Upon hearing this, he emerged from Rājagṛha in a display of great opulence and royal power, with two thousand chariots and 1,800 mares, accompanied by thousands upon thousands of brahmins and householders who lived in Magadha. As he was coming out of the city gates to go before the Blessed One, see him, and venerate him, the crown fell off his head, and the thought occurred to him, “Perhaps this bodes ill for my visit to the Blessed One?”
$436 The gods called out to him, “Good shall come of this! Good shall come of you seeing the Blessed One and venerating him. However, some of the people you have imprisoned have produced roots of virtue. It would be right for you to release these prisoners who yet remain in your country, king, and proclaim throughout the country that they too should come along to see the Blessed One and venerate him.”
$437 No sooner had King Bimbisāra heard this than he released the prisoners, calling together all the many people who lived in his country. As he was traveling in the company of this great crowd of people all the way to the Magadha stūpa called Very Steady, near Forest of Reeds, he looked back at his assembled army. When he saw his entire army assembled he became arrogant and thought, “No one can equal me in appearance and might.”
$438 The Blessed One directly apprehended what King Bimbisāra was thinking, so he emanated five hundred kings, gorgeous and statuesque, to whom he began teaching the Dharma. King Bimbisāra of Magadha approached the Blessed One. The king went as far as he could go by vehicle [106.b] and then left behind the five signs of his consecration—crown, parasol, sword, jewel, and tail fan—as well as his colorful boots, and approached the Blessed One.
$439 There he saw the five hundred kings, gorgeous and statuesque, sitting before the Blessed One listening to the Dharma. When he saw them, all his arrogance about his appearance vanished, and he thought, “If I do not state my name and my lineage, the Blessed One will take no interest in me.” So he approached the Blessed One, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, knelt down on his right knee, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and three times stated his name and lineage.
“Lord, I am King Bimbisāra of Magadha. Lord, I am King Bimbisāra of Magadha . . . .”
$440 Thereupon the Blessed One spoke, saying, “So it is, Great King. You are King Bimbisāra of Magadha. Please take your seat, Great King.”
Then King Bimbisāra of Magadha touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side. Some of the brahmins and householders of Magadha also touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and took seats to one side. Some made all manner of entertaining and jovial conversation with the Blessed One and took seats to one side. Some bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together and took seats to one side. Some saw the Blessed Buddha from a distance, [107.a] and upon seeing the Blessed One, took seats to one side.
$441 At that time the dreadlocked ascetic Venerable Uruvilvā Kāśyapa was also seated among the company. The brahmins and householders of Magadha thought, “Does the Great Ascetic practice Kāśyapa ’s code of conduct, or does the dreadlocked ascetic Venerable Uruvilvā Kāśyapa practice the Great Ascetic’s code of conduct?”
$442 The Blessed One directly apprehended what the brahmins and householders of Magadha were thinking, and he addressed Venerable Kāśyapa in verse:
“Inhabitant of Uruvilvā, what do you see? Here there is no fire, sage, or observance. Kāśyapa , why have you given up the fire sacrifice? Please, tell me all the reasons why.”
$443 He replied:
“Some here praise food and drink, Others retinue, or women.#224 Since I’ve seen the impurity of these heaps, I find no joy in the sacrificial fire.”
$444 The Blessed One inquired:
“If you’ve no taste for lusting, nor for food, Nor for drink, nor for a high, haughty seat, How is it that you—among all on earth— Could be happy, Kāśyapa ? Answer this question for me.”
$445 He replied:
“There is no greater peace than being free of heaps,#225 Nothing like non-attachment to sense pleasures and existence.#226 Having seen the state that another cannot induce, I find no joy in the sacrificial fire.
$446 “My deluded mind thought I’d be liberated By sacrifices and fire observances. Since I hadn’t seen the supreme state free of death, Birth followed death and I remained blind.
$447 “Now I’ve seen the uncompounded state The best of humans and protector taught so well. You, Gautama—foremost of sages, well versed in truth— Truly were born to benefit many beings.”
$448 The Blessed One said:
“You have reflected well upon What strikes to the vital point#227 As you dwelt upon phenomena, so finely distinguished— [107.b] You are welcome to resolve it once and for all.#228
“O Kāśyapa , may you fill those in your retinue with sorrow for saṃsāra!”
$449 Then, just as the dreadlocked ascetic Venerable Uruvilvā Kāśyapa placed his mind in equipoise and entered into meditative stabilization , rising up into the eastern sky, he began to carry out the four activities—walking, sitting, standing, and sleeping—and entered into equipoise on the element of fire. Now in equipoise on the element of fire, from his body the dreadlocked ascetic Venerable Uruvilvā Kāśyapa emitted rays of light in various hues such as blue, gold, red, white, rose madder, and crystalline, then made a further display of miracles: fire blazed from his upper body while a stream of cool water flowed from his lower body; then fire blazed and from his lower body while a stream of cool water flowed from his upper body.
$450 He then performed the same miracles in the south, the west, and the north that he performed in the east. Having displayed miracles in each of the four cardinal directions the dreadlocked ascetic Venerable Uruvilvā Kāśyapa concluded his miraculous display, and then he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and declared to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, you are my teacher. I am a disciple of the Blessed One. The Sugata is my teacher. I am a disciple of the Sugata.”
“ Kāśyapa , so it is,” the Blessed One replied. “It is just as you say, Kāśyapa . I am your teacher, Kāśyapa . You are my disciple. Kāśyapa , take your place on your designated seat, just as it should be.”
$451 The dreadlocked ascetic Venerable Uruvilvā Kāśyapa took his place on his designated seat, [108.a] just as it should be, whereupon the brahmins and householders of Magadha thought, “The dreadlocked ascetic Venerable Uruvilvā Kāśyapa practices the ascetic Gautama’s code of conduct. It is certain, then, that the Great Ascetic does not practice Uruvilvā Kāśyapa ’s code of conduct.”
$452 Thereupon the Blessed One addressed King Bimbisāra of Magadha: “Great King, forms arise and decay, one after another. You should know the arising of forms, and you should know their decay. Great King, sensations, perceptions, formations, and consciousness likewise arise and decay, one after another. You should know their arising, and you should know their decay. Great King, knowing the nature of forms’ arising and decay, you will understand form. Great King, knowing also the nature of the arising and decay of sensations, perceptions, formations, and consciousness, you will understand consciousness.
$453 “Great King, when you understand form, you do not grasp at it, thinking, ‘This is my self!’#229 Nor do you appropriate it, dwell upon it, or continue your habitual adherence to it. Great King, when you understand sensations, perceptions, formations, and consciousness, you do not grasp at consciousness, thinking, ‘This is my self!’ Nor do you appropriate it, dwell upon it, or continue your habitual adherence to it.
$454 “Great King, not grasping at form nor appropriating it, dwelling upon it, or habitually adhering to it—this I call ‘the infinite, the boundless, nirvāṇa.’ Great King, not grasping at sensations, perceptions, formations, and consciousness, nor appropriating them, dwelling upon them, or habitually adhering to them—this I call ‘the infinite, the unbounded, nirvāṇa.’ ” [108.b]
$455 The brahmins and householders of Magadha then reflected, “If forms are not the self, and, likewise, sensations, perceptions, formations, and consciousness are not the self, what then is the self, the being, the life force, the creature, the soul, the person, the human being, humankind, the actor, the agent, the speaker, the feeler, the creator, or the fundamental creator? If nothing has been born or arisen, and nothing will arise, then once these aggregates are discarded no other aggregates will be appropriated.”
$456 The Blessed One directly apprehended what the brahmins and householders of Magadha were thinking, then addressed the monks: “Monks, the so-called ‘self’ is only something apprehended by ordinary beings who do not know any better. But there is in fact no such self or anything possessed there.
“Monks, this suffering is born at birth, and this suffering ceases at cessation. These formations are born at birth, and these formations cease at cessation. Consigned to such causes and conditions, beings will be subject to a perpetual stream of formations.
$457 “Monks, the Tathāgata directly apprehends the reincarnation of beings in a perpetual stream of formation, and labels it death, transmigration, and rebirth. With perfectly clear divine vision, beyond that of normal humans, the Blessed One sees how beings continue to die and transmigrate, and continue to take birth; whether they will have a good appearance or a bad one; and whether they will take happy births or fall to lower realms.
$458 “I am fully aware of their actions, and I am fully aware of their destinations. I see that when they separate from their bodies at death—by cause and condition of the wrong views and actions they adopted—those who comport themselves wrongly, those who speak wrongly, those who reflect wrongly, those who hurl insults at the noble ones, [109.a] and those who hold wrong views will fall to lower realms and take rebirth as hell beings. And I see that when they separate from their bodies at death—by cause and condition of the right Dharma and actions they adopted—those who comport themselves rightly, those who speak rightly, those who reflect rightly, those who refrain from hurling insults at the noble ones, and those who hold right views will take the highest rebirth among the god realms.
$459 “Monks, because I have known it to be so and seen it to be so, I would not say, ‘I am self, I am a being, I am a life force, I am a creature, I am the soul, I am a person, I am a human being, I am part of humankind, I am an actor, I am an agent, I am a speaker, I am a feeler, I am the creator, or I am a fundamental creator.’ These things I would not say. Nor would I grasp at the thought, ‘Although they are not arisen, have never arisen, and will never arise, when these aggregates are discarded no other aggregates will be appropriated.”
$460 “But this does not include the conventional expression of the Dharma. The conventional expression of the Dharma is as follows: since this is, this will be; since this has arisen, this will arise. Thus, due to the condition of ignorance there are formations. Due to the condition of formations there is consciousness. Due to the condition of consciousness there are name and form. Due to the conditions of name and form there are the six sense bases. Due to the condition of the six sense bases there is contact . Due to the condition of contact there is sensation. Due to the condition of sensation there is craving . Due to the condition of craving there is appropriation. Due to the condition of appropriation there is becoming . Due to the condition of becoming there is birth . Due to the condition of birth there is old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and strife. [109.b] Thus does this entire great heap of suffering arise.
$461 “So it is that without this, that will not occur. If this ceases, that will cease. In this way, due to the cessation of ignorance, formations will cease. Due to the cessation of formations, consciousness will cease. Due to the cessation of consciousness, name and form will cease. Due to the cessation of name and form, the six sense bases will cease. Due to the cessation of the six sense bases, contact will cease. Due to the cessation of contact , sensation will cease. Due to the cessation of sensation, craving will cease. Due to the cessation of craving , appropriation will cease. Due to the cessation of appropriation, becoming will cease. Due to the cessation of becoming, birth will cease. Due to the cessation of birth , old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and strife will cease. Thus does this entire great heap of suffering cease.
“In this way, monks, if the cause arises, suffering will arise, and if the cause ceases, suffering too will cease. Its course interrupted, it cannot begin, and in the absence of rebirth, it ceases to be. This alone is the end of suffering.”
$462 Then the Blessed One asked King Bimbisāra of Magadha two times, “Great King, what do you think—is material form permanent, or is it, rather, impermanent?”
“Lord, it is impermanent,” he replied.
“And that which is impermanent—is it suffering, or is it, rather, not suffering?”
“Lord, it is suffering,” he replied.
$463 “Regarding those things that are impermanent and, therefore, suffering—do noble listeners, educated in the teachings, hold them to be a self and grasp at the thought that they are their possession, them, or their self?”
“Lord, they do not,” he replied.
$464 Then the Blessed One asked, [110.a] “Great King, what do you think—are sensations, perceptions, formations, and consciousness permanent or impermanent?”
“Lord, they are impermanent,” he replied.
“And that which is impermanent—is it suffering, or is it, rather, not suffering?”
“Lord, it is suffering,” he replied.
$465 Then the Blessed One asked, “Regarding those things that are impermanent and, therefore, suffering—do noble listeners, educated in the teachings, hold them to be a self and grasp at the thought that they are their possession, them, or their self?”
“No, Lord, they do not.”
$466 “Great King,” the Blessed One then said, “that is why no form—whether past, present, or future; inner or outer; gross or subtle; bad or good; near or far away—could possibly be a possession, them, or their self. Thus should you regard them, with perfect wisdom.
“What do you think, Great King? Neither could sensations, nor perceptions, nor formations, nor consciousness—whether past, present, or future; inner or outer; gross or subtle; bad or good; near or far away—possibly be a possession, them, or their self. Thus should you regard them, with perfect wisdom.
$467 “Noble listeners, educated in the teachings, who see thus, will become disillusioned with material forms. They will become disillusioned with sensations, perceptions, formations, and consciousness. In their disillusionment they will cling to nothing. And when they cling to nothing, they will be liberated. [110.b] Thus liberated, they will think, ‘I have been liberated. My wisdom and vision are manifest. I have exhausted my rebirths. I have succeeded in the practice of the holy life. I have done what was before me. I shall know no other existence.’ And thinking thus, their wisdom and vision will manifest.”
$468 When this Dharma teaching had been explained, King Bimbisāra of Magadha and the others—the eighty thousand gods and the thousands upon thousands of brahmins and householders of Magadha—were able to see these things unobscured, with the Dharma vision that has no trace of dust or stain with respect to phenomena. King Bimbisāra of Magadha had perceived the truths, discovered the truths, realized the truths, and fathomed the truths to their very depths, until whatever doubt and hesitation he had he overcame.
$469 Then, of his own accord, completely unprompted, and unafraid of the truths his teacher had shown him, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and asked the Blessed One, “Lord, I have become a noble one. I am a noble one. Lord, I take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha of those gone forth. Please accept me as a faithful lay vow holder, from the depths of my heart, from this day forth, for as long as I live.
$470 “Blessed One, I beseech you, please come to Rājagṛha. I shall offer my respect and service to the Blessed One and the saṅgha of those gone forth. For as long as I live, please permit me to provide the Blessed One and the saṅgha of those gone forth with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick.”
$471 Then the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “Tell us why the Blessed One led King Bimbisāra and the rest of the eighty thousand gods and thousands upon thousands of brahmins and householders of Magadha to go for refuge and established them in the fundamental precepts and the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa, [111.a] and how it was cause for the fame of the Blessed One to spread throughout the entire world.”
$472 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I placed King Bimbisāra and the rest of the eighty thousand gods and thousands upon thousands of brahmins and householders of Magadha in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges, and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions, which was cause for my fame to spread throughout the entire world. Listen well!
$473 “Monks, in times gone by, during King Diśāṃpati’s reign in the city of Pāṁśula the kingdom was prosperous, flourishing, happy, and well populated. The harvest was good. Quarreling and arguments had ceased, there was no fighting or infighting, and there were no robbers, thieves, illness, or famine. Rice, sugarcane, cattle, and buffalo were plentiful. His was a reign in accord with the Dharma, and he treated the kingdom like a beloved only child.
$474 “As he and the queen enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day the queen conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him Reṇu.
$475 “Prince Reṇu was brought up with two nurses to hold him in their laps, two wet nurses, two nurses to bathe him, and two nurses to play with him—eight nurses in all. They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and furthermore on every good thing he needed, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake.
$476 “As the young man grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, [111.b] such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$477 “King Diśāṃpati’s magistrate was a brahmin householder named Govinda, who was capable, clear-minded, and trustworthy, an intelligent person with deep knowledge of methods of accounting. Since King Diśāṃpati’s magistrate, the brahmin householder Govinda, was already administering all his righteous works, he put the kingdom in his hands as well, and himself stayed up on the roof of his palatial home in the company of women, playing music, enjoying himself, and coupling.
$478 “One day the brahmin Govinda’s wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him Guardian of the Flame.
$479 “They reared young Guardian of the Flame on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda, [112.a] how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences.
$480 “Soon after, Guardian of the Flame’s father said to him, ‘Son, after I, your father, pass away you will take over my position in the kingdom, and you will become its magistrate. You should tour this kingdom. You have not toured it before, and it would be good for you to do so.’
“ ‘I shall do as my lord instructs,’ Guardian of the Flame replied, and he began to follow Prince Reṇu about like a shadow.
$481 “One day the brahmin Govinda died, and on account of his death Diśāṃpati began to grieve and suffer greatly, wailing and lamenting, whereupon Prince Reṇu asked the king, ‘Deva, why do you sit there, weary from wailing and mourning in despair over the brahmin Govinda’s passing?’
“The king replied, ‘The brahmin Govinda administers each and every righteous deed of my kingdom. It’s on his account that my heart shrinks with grief.’
$482 “ ‘Deva,’ Prince Reṇu said, ‘don’t grieve so over the passing of the brahmin Govinda. Don’t weary yourself so. Don’t wail so. Deva, your counselor’s own son, the young brahmin called Guardian of the Flame, is far more exalted than even his father. Deva, I urge you, appoint him as your magistrate, that he might administer all the righteous works of the kingdom for you.’
$483 “No sooner had King Diśāṃpati heard this than he sent for the young brahmin Guardian of the Flame and appointed him magistrate, whereupon he likewise took over all the king’s duties. One day, after ceding the throne to Prince Reṇu, [112.b] Diśāṃpati died. From then on he was no longer called Prince Reṇu, but King Reṇu.
$484 “King Reṇu summoned the young brahmin Guardian of the Flame and told him, ‘Counselor, may you carry out all the righteous works of my kingdom just as you did those of my father.’
“ ‘As you wish, Deva,’ the young brahmin replied.
$485 “The brahmin Guardian of the Flame took on all King Reṇu’s royal duties, after which he was no longer called Guardian of the Flame, but Guardian of the Flame Govinda. At that time, while King Reṇu was still young, friendly, and companionable, there were six princes of the warrior class who came before the king and said, ‘Deva, we ask that you bestow to us our own countries.’
$486 “As soon as the king heard this, he told Guardian of the Flame Govinda, ‘Counselor Govinda , divide this great land into seven parts. Give six parts to these princes, and let one be mine.’
“ ‘As you wish, Deva,’ he replied.
$487 “Then Guardian of the Flame Govinda divided that great land into seven parts, giving six parts to the princes, with one part remaining as King Reṇu’s share. King Reṇu appointed each of the six warriors to his own kingdom, and Guardian of the Flame Govinda was esteemed as Brahmā in Jambudvīpa. The people held Guardian of the Flame Govinda as the way to Brahmā, and regarded him as such.
$488 “One day the brahmin Govinda thought, ‘People throughout the kingdoms esteem me as Brahmā, think that I am the way to Brahmā, and regard me as such. Old brahmin Viṣṇu is aged and infirm, and I’ve heard from the masters of our group that Sahāṃpati Brahmā will come to see a brahmin [113.a] who keeps his mind full of love throughout the four months of the rainy season. Therefore I shall cast all else aside and go to the roof of the palace to dwell amid thoughts of love, compassion, joy, and equanimity.’
$489 “He told the king, ‘Deva, please know, for the four months of the rainy season I wish to abide in the domain of Brahmā. Therefore, Deva must appoint another magistrate to carry out all the righteous works of the kingdom.’
“ ‘As you wish,’ King Reṇu said.
$490 “No sooner had the brahmin Mahā­govinda heard this than he cast aside all his duties, went to the roof of the palace, and there on the roof dwelt amid thoughts of love, compassion, joy, and equanimity. Finally, one day Sahāṃpati Brahmā came to see him, and because of Sahāṃpati Brahmā’s appearance the roof of the palace was completely bathed in light. When he saw this the brahmin Mahā­govinda said in verse:
$491 “ ‘Never before have I heard of or seen A color as beautiful as this. A brilliant mien, a brilliant form— Pray tell me, my friend, who you are.’
$492 “Sahāṃpati Brahmā said, ‘Boy,
“ ‘Other embodied beings Like Kumāra, Indra, and the rest Know me as the embodiment of Brahmā, And so too should you know me, Govinda .’
$493 “The great, high brahmin Govinda responded in verse:
“ ‘Brahmā, I bow down before you. Brahmā, I worship you. Please hear what I say and then Grant your answer without delay.’
$494 “Sahāṃpati Brahmā replied:
“ ‘ Govinda , I shall listen To any word you say. Brahmin, you may ask me Any question in your heart. [113.b]
$495 “ ‘Whether for the sake of this life, Or for the sake of the next, Be assured I shall consider Whatever you see fit to ask.’
$496 “The brahmin Mahā­govinda said:
“ ‘About my doubts and the doubts that others cast, I shall ask you, eternal prince of brahmins. Then I shall think upon it and study it well, For dispassionate are they who attain Brahmāloka.’
$497 “Sahāṃpati Brahmā said:
“ ‘Brahmā bows with undivided attention to those who abandon pride. He dwells in those motivated by compassion, Who have the scent of virtue, and who abjure sex. He teaches them, and such dispassionate ones Attain Brahmāloka.’
$498 “The young brahmin Mahā­govinda asked:
“ ‘Brahmā, who are these people who reek of sin, Who spread like a river that’s overflown its banks, Who wander through lower rebirth, defile the entire world, And know not the path to attaining Brahmā?’
$499 “Sahāṃpati Brahmā answered:
“ ‘The angry, lying, malicious, and deceitful, Who do wrong with a slanderous heart, Who are lustful, hateful, ignorant, Secretive, stingy, and mean—
$500 “ ‘Brahmin, those are the people who reek of sin, Who spread like a river that’s overflown its banks, Who wander through lower rebirth, defile the entire world, And do not know the path to attaining Brahmā.
$501 “ ‘But those who rise above this habit Of ever taking such actions Will be reborn pure, as Brahmā. Therefore may you be firmly vigilant.’
“Having spoken thus, Sahāṃpati Brahmā disappeared on the spot.
$502 “Soon after Sahāṃpati Brahmā disappeared, the young brahmin Mahā­govinda thought, ‘I have understood the meaning that Sahāṃpati Brahmā taught. If I thus remain at home, living as a householder, it will be dull, and lifelong practice of pure conduct—complete, untainted, and pure—will be difficult. Let me then [114.a] shave my head and face, don the colorful robes of the holy, and with nothing short of perfect faith go forth from home to live as a mendicant.’
$503 “One day King Reṇu went to see the brahmin Mahā­govinda, and upon his arrival he touched his head to the brahmin Mahā­govinda’s feet and took a seat at one side. Brahmin Mahā­govinda said to King Reṇu:
$504 “ ‘Lord of the land, great King Reṇu, Listen now to what I say! You are the kingdom’s great defense; I, the brahmin Govinda , am weary.’
$505 “King Reṇu replied:
“ ‘I will grant you Your wish, yet unfulfilled. I will dispel what harms you. Govinda , don’t leave me.’
$506 “Mahā­govinda said:
“ ‘No wish of mine is unfulfilled, And there are none who harm me. I heard a wondrous being speak— Now I’m weary of home life.’
$507 “King Reṇu inquired:
“ ‘Whose words did you hear that you Abandon both me and your wants? What was this wondrous being like? Brahmin, answer me this question.’
$508 “Mahā­govinda replied:
“ ‘As I dwelt upon compassion, Reflecting deeply in solitude, Brahmā manifested and Light shone in every direction.
$509 “ ‘I listened to what he said, Now I’m weary of home.’
$510 “King Reṇu said, ‘Counselor, please remain here until I cede the throne to my eldest son. Then after you have gone forth, counselor, I too will do the same.’ And then he said in verse:
“ ‘Brahmin, wherever you go, I will follow you there. I shall act as your disciple. Govinda , you are my teacher.’
$511 “Mahā­govinda told him:
“ ‘Cast away desire, to which Ordinary people cling. Ignore such desires And be steadfast in the true Dharma.’
$512 “King Reṇu said:
“ ‘Because Brahmā is pure from birth— Unsullied as the skies— Then likewise pure as beryl [114.b] May I practice brahmacarya, the holy life.’
$513 “Mahā­govinda replied, ‘Great King, if you know the time is right, may you do so.’ The brahmin Mahā­govinda asked the six kings of the warrior class, ‘If I decide to shave my head and face, don the colorful religious robes, and with nothing short of perfect faith go forth from home to live as a mendicant, will you do the same?’
$514 “ ‘Counselor,’ they replied, ‘please stay on for seven more years. In seven years we shall cede our thrones to our sons and younger brothers, and then after you go forth, counselor, we shall do likewise.’
$515 “Mahā­govinda said, ‘Oh, seven years is much too long. Desires will become inveterate. Pleasures will become intoxicating. And it will be difficult to tell the difference between life and death. Since there is no certainty whether in seven years you yourselves will go forth, this is all the more reason I should go forth.’
$516 “ ‘Counselor, wait awhile,’ they pleaded. ‘If you wait just six years, or five, or four, or three, or two, or one; or just seven months, or six, or five, or four, or three, or two, or one; or just seven days, or six, or five, or four, or three, or two, or one, then we shall cede our thrones to our sons and younger brothers, and after you go forth, counselor, we shall do the same.’
$517 “ Govinda replied, ‘My, isn’t even seven days too long a time? Desires will become inveterate. Pleasures will become intoxicating. And it will be difficult to tell the difference between life and death. Since there is no certainty whether in seven days you yourselves will go forth, this is all the more reason I should go forth.’
$518 “They said, ‘Never mind even seven days, then. This very day we shall cede our thrones to our sons and younger brothers, and [115.a] after you go forth, counselor, we shall do the same.’
“ ‘If you know the time is right,’ said Govinda , ‘may you do so.’
$519 “Thereupon the brahmin Mahā­govinda turned his attention from the company of the six kings of the warrior class, and regarded the seven great, high brahmins. He then turned his attention from the seven great, high brahmins, and regarded forty women with whom he was acquainted. He then turned his attention from the forty women with whom he was acquainted, and regarded five hundred young brahmins.
$520 “He then turned his attention from the five hundred young brahmins, and regarded all the myriad carriage drivers, mahouts, equestrians, charioteers, infantry, archers, aides-de-camp, and dependents;#230 the fearsome, the heroic, and the oppressed;#231 and all the many princes, and asked, ‘If I decide to shave my head and face, don the colorful religious robes, and with nothing short of perfect faith go forth from home to live as a mendicant, will you do the same?’
“They replied, ‘After you go forth, counselor, we shall do the same.’
“ ‘If you know the time is right,’ said Govinda , ‘may you do so.’
$521 “So the brahmin Mahā­govinda gave up all household affairs, gave gifts and made merit, gave much to the poor, shaved his head and face, donned the colorful religious robes, and with nothing short of perfect faith went forth from home to live as a mendicant. After he went forth, he went to live in the forest, fashioning a hut of branches and leaves, and while staying there he generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges, becoming a person of great miracles and great power. After Govinda went forth, King Reṇu and his suite of hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of attendants shaved their heads and faces, donned the colorful religious robes, and with nothing short of perfect faith [115.b] went forth from home to live as mendicants.
$522 “After Govinda had gone forth, likewise the six kings of the warrior class, the high brahmins, the seven great, high brahmins, the forty women with whom he was acquainted, and the five hundred young brahmins; all the myriad carriage drivers, mahouts, equestrians, charioteers, infantry, archers, aides-de-camp, and dependents; the fearsome, the heroic, and the oppressed; and all the many princes shaved their heads and faces, donned the colorful robes of the holy, and with nothing short of perfect faith all went forth from home to live as mendicants.
$523 “After the brahmin Govinda conferred on all of them instructions to ponder, through diligence, practice, and effort they generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
Thereafter the great, high brahmin Govinda ’s name was no longer great, high brahmin Govinda . Instead they called him Govinda the Teacher.
$524 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was called Govinda the Teacher then. The one who was King Reṇu then is none other than King Bimbisāra. The hundreds upon hundreds of thousands who were led by King Reṇu then are none other than the eighty thousand gods and the hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of brahmins and householders of Magadha now led by King Bimbisāra.
$525 “At that time I led King Reṇu and others—many people of his country and thousands upon thousands of brahmins and householders—to go forth, and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. For this reason my fame spread throughout the world. Now as well I have sated King Bimbisāra, the eighty thousand gods, [116.a] and thousands upon thousands of brahmins and householders of Magadha with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
The Quarrel
$526 One time when the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, many in Śrāvastī were caught up in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention.
The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$527 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?” [116.b]
$528 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$529 The Blessed One thought, “The time has come to tame all of these people. I shall turn them away from this strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, and establish them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.” In the morning he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, we went to Śrāvastī for alms and traveled to where those people were.
$530 The people saw the Blessed One coming from a distance, and they were filled with wonder at the sight of him. They prepared a seat for him and requested him, “This way, Blessed One—if you please! Welcome, Blessed One, very good! O Blessed One, please have a seat on this cushion we have prepared for you!”
$531 After the Blessed One had taken his place, he questioned them all, saying, “Friends, what are you doing? If you need to quarrel with others, is there anyone else with whom you could quarrel?”
“Tell us, Blessed One,” they replied, “with whom should we quarrel?”
$532 The Blessed One said, “Please be seated, friends, and I shall tell you in detail.” They touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. Then the Blessed One said to them, “It is your afflictive emotions you must fight. You should struggle to cast away your afflictive emotions.”
$533 The Blessed One taught the Dharma particularly suited to them and they were no longer bound by their anger. [117.a] When they heard it, they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$534 After seeing the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$535 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$536 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why the Blessed One pacified the conflict among those many people and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well I placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Listen well!
$537 “Monks, in times gone by, [117.b] in a remote mountain village, a certain brahmin performed a sacrifice. When the sacrifice was being performed, some other brahmins fought over a seat. There was a certain sage living in a forest devoted to austerities with five hundred attendants. The sage was at that sacrifice, so he taught them the Dharma particularly suited to them in order to pacify the brahmins’ conflict, and thus the conflict was pacified. The brahmins became disillusioned with saṃsāra and went forth in his presence. After they went forth, they generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$538 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the brahmins then are none other than all these brahmins. At that time I pacified their conflict and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well I have pacified their conflict and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$539 “They also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. At that time, having practiced pure conduct all their lives, their faculties ripened and now they have been liberated.”
The Nāga (2)
$540 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, one of King Prasenajit’s high ministers had everything he possessed confiscated on account of a dispute#232 and was thrown into the dungeon where he suffered from hunger and thirst and died.
$541 Now he had made very wicked prayers, and after he died and transmigrated, he took rebirth as a vicious yakṣa. Then he set a plague upon people all over Kośala, and after a great many had died the soothsayers declared, “At his death the high minister made very wicked prayers. Now he has taken rebirth as a vicious yakṣa. [118.a] It is he who set this plague upon us.”
$542 When the people heard this, they were desperate and did not know what to do. King Prasenajit thought, “No one can tame him. I shall have to implore the Blessed One right now to do so.” He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side.
$543 Once he had taken a seat at one side, King Prasenajit implored the Blessed One, “Lord, the Blessed One has tamed vicious nāgas like Nanda, Upananda , and others besides. You have tamed even the vicious yakṣa lord Aṭavika, and others besides. How wonderful it would be if, out of compassion, the Blessed One could tame this vicious yakṣa as well.” The Blessed One assented by his silence. King Prasenajit then praised this assurance from the Blessed One, rejoiced, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took leave of the Blessed One.
$544 By means of a miracle the Blessed One set the yakṣa down near the garden of Prince Jeta, and to tame him he emanated a great fire. The yakṣa saw the great fire surrounding him on every side, and that it was peaceful only at the feet of the Blessed One. Afraid for his life, the vicious yakṣa approached the Blessed One, and the Blessed One said to him, “My friend, you were executed by King Prasenajit for a previous nonvirtuous action. [118.b] Even now, since taking rebirth here you have killed many. When you die and transmigrate, what will be your next birth? Where will you go?”
$545 “Blessed One, what advice can you give me?” the yakṣa beseeched him.
“Give up these evil acts,” the Blessed One instructed. “Go for refuge and maintain the fundamental precepts.”
“I shall do just as the Blessed One says,” said the yakṣa. He went for refuge, took the fundamental precepts, and swore to the Blessed One, “Lord, I have given up evil acts. From this day forth, Lord, I shall guard and protect all the many inhabitants of Śrāvastī.”
$546 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the Blessed One tamed this vicious yakṣa, thereby granting many freedom from fear.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I tamed this vicious yakṣa, and thereby granted many freedom from fear. Listen well!
$547 “Monks, in times gone by, during King Brahmadatta’s reign in the city of Vārāṇasī, a certain poisonous, extraordinarily venomous nāga appeared in Kāśi and emptied both the villages and the countryside. King Brahmadatta heard that he was headed in the direction of Vārāṇasī, and upon hearing this he flushed with terror. He armed the four divisions of his army and ordered them, ‘Go, kill the poisonous nāga!’
“But they bowed down at his feet and said, ‘Deva, a host of armies could not slay it. Mantras and medicine cannot slay it. Perhaps the ascetics or brahmins [119.a] could tame it with their virtuous ways?’
$548 “Now at that time there lived in Vārāṇasī a certain young untouchable with a loving nature, great compassion, and a love for beings. As he saw that the people were confused about what to do, he felt immense compassion for them, and assured them, ‘There is no need for such desperate uncertainty, for I shall tame this poisonous nāga.’
“To this his parents replied, ‘Its very breath is poisonous—you will not be able to tame it.’
$549 “ ‘If I don the armor of love,’ the child said, ‘he cannot harm me in the least.’ With that the child set out in the direction the poisonous nāga had gone. As the child approached, the wicked snake saw him from a distance, and blew his poisonous breath at him in anger.
“The child centered himself in love, and looked up at the poisonous nāga with love. No sooner had he cast this gaze than the poison disappeared. Then the boy picked up the nāga-snake in his two hands and set him down in a region where no people lived.
$550 “King Brahmadatta and the others heard that young untouchable so-and-so had tamed the poisonous nāga. As soon as they heard this, the king himself approached the young untouchable and bid the child request some type of boon as his reward, saying, ‘I will grant you some type of boon.’
$551 “The child replied, ‘Take the path of the ten virtuous actions and there remain. Then set the people of your country on the path of the ten virtuous actions.’
“At that, King Brahmadatta heaped material comforts upon him, adopted the path of the ten virtuous actions, and there remained while also setting the people of his country on the path of the ten virtuous actions.
$552 “O monks, what do you think? [119.b] I am the one who was that young untouchable then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was the poisonous nāga then is none other than this vicious yakṣa. Those who were all those many people then are now the many inhabitants of Kośala. At that time I tamed that poisonous nāga, thereby granting many freedom from fear. Now as well I have tamed this vicious yakṣa, and thereby granted many freedom from fear.
$553 “They also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all their lives then, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
Two Stories about King Śibi
The First Story about King Śibi
$554 As#233 the Blessed One was traveling through the province of Mallā, he stepped off the road that led to the Antavān River and to Kuśinagarī and said to Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, make four folds in the Tathāgata’s upper garment, and lay it out. I will rest my sore back awhile.”
Venerable Ānanda said, “As you please, Lord.” Heeding the word of the Blessed One, he made four folds in the upper garment, laid it out, and informed the Blessed One, “Lord, I have made four folds in the Tathāgata’s upper garment and laid it out. Blessed One, please know that the time has come.”
$555 The Blessed One, seeing that his Dharma robes and patched raiment had been folded up and set out, sat himself down, and then mindful, self-possessed, and with clear perception, he lay down on his right side, placing one leg upon the other.
$556 The Blessed One thought, [120.a] “Of all those ascetics here in the assembly who are ordinary persons, whom might the Buddha tame, and whom might his disciples tame?” Then the Blessed One thought, “There are some here to be tamed by the Buddha, and some to be tamed by his disciples.” With this thought the Blessed One instructed Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, speak with eloquence about the wings of enlightenment,”#234 and performed a miracle so that the sound of his voice carried across the whole assembly.
$557 Many of the monks thus heard the sound of his voice and thought, “The Blessed One has exhorted Venerable Ānanda to give a discourse on the wings of enlightenment. Now Venerable Ānanda will teach the Dharma that is sweet as honey from the hive.” They approached the Blessed One and upon their arrival sat in a circle around him.
$558 Venerable Ānanda addressed the monks: “Venerable Ones! When the Blessed One became a totally and completely awakened buddha he used his perfect knowledge and taught the limbs of enlightenment.#235 Right mindfulness means to commit oneself to solitude, to commit oneself to freedom from attachment, to commit oneself to cessation of the afflictive emotions,#236 and to transform oneself through complete detachment.
$559 “Venerable Ones! When the Blessed One became a totally and completely awakened buddha with perfect knowledge, he taught the limbs of enlightenment. Analysis of phenomena, diligence, joy, mental and physical pliancy, meditative stabilization , and equanimity likewise mean to commit oneself to solitude, to commit oneself to freedom from attachment, to commit oneself to cessation of the afflictive emotions, and to transform oneself through complete detachment.”
$560 After Venerable Ānanda [120.b] had set forth the limbs of enlightenment, he gave the monks the relevant Dharma teaching such that the disciples and those with the right roots of virtue cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship right where they sat.
$561 When the Blessed One understood that Venerable Ānanda had completed his discourse, he sat down cross-legged, with his body straight, and his mind completely recollected, and then asked Venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, did you teach diligence?”
“Yes, Blessed One,” he replied, “I taught diligence.”
$562 “Ānanda, did you teach diligence?”
“Yes, Sugata, I taught diligence.”
“Ānanda,” the Blessed One declared, “diligence leads to unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment.”
$563 After the Blessed One had set forth the wings of enlightenment, he taught the Dharma particularly suited to them such that those connected to the Blessed One and the roots of virtue cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship, right where they sat.
$564 As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved insight, superknowledge, and discrimination. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$565 On that occasion one monk spoke in verse:
“Monks, the teacher asked to hear The sweet Dharma, as he was ill. [121.a] Now you have the limbs of enlightenment, So teach it wherever you will!
$566 “Elder Ānanda, skilled, respected, And learned, consented to teach. He is a master of all the pure teachings That you, the hero, have preached.
$567 “Mindfulness, analysis, diligence, Joy, pliancy, meditation, And equanimity—these are the pure limbs Of your enlightenment.
$568 “Told of the heart of the limbs of enlightenment, He realized the heart of the limbs of enlightenment. The Blessed One thus recovered from his injury, Which was more painful than a severe illness.#237
$569 “If even the Lord of Dharma himself, Who taught this precious, holy Dharma, Asked to hear the holy Dharma, Why should others not listen to him?
$570 “He who has all ten powers Declared Upatiṣya Wisest of monks, but even he Is overcome with desire to hear the Dharma.
$571 “They hold the sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā— They’re wise and they see what’s true. If they hearken to this holy Dharma, Why should others not listen too?
$572 “The wise, intent on learning, Who lend their ears as they should, Also take great joy in The Buddha’s flawless teaching.
$573 “When the mind is glad, and body supple, And all experience is bliss— From out of bliss, your mind can touch The depths of meditation.
$574 “With equipoise, the mind knows That all objects are conditioned. It becomes weary of saṃsāric birth. Without attachment, the mind is freed.
$575 “Weary of perpetual rebirth in saṃsāra, Not attached to the realm of gods or humans, Gone like fire when the fuel is spent The arhats enter nirvāṇa.
$576 “The Conqueror also taught the many Benefits of hearing the holy Dharma. Reflecting upon how this is so, Let us listen to our teacher’s word.”
$577 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why the Blessed One, who teaches pithy teachings, [121.b] requested a pithy teaching, and how the Blessed One exhorted Venerable Ānanda for a pithy teaching. We who venerate you are listening with respect. Please tell us why.”
$578 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “just as now the Tathāgata, who teaches pithy teachings, has requested a pithy teaching, in past times as well, and in the same way, the Tathāgata, who teaches pithy teachings, requested a pithy teaching, and I performed a magnificent austerity for the sake of a pithy teaching. Listen well!
$579 “Monks, it took place in times gone by, during King Śibi’s reign in the royal palace of Catuṣka. The kingdom was prosperous, flourishing, happy, and well populated. The harvest was good. Quarreling and arguments had ceased, there was no fighting or infighting, and there were no robbers, thieves, illness, or famine. Rice, sugarcane, cattle, and buffalo were plentiful. His was a reign in accord with the Dharma. He ruled the kingdom gently and mercifully, as a parent cares for a beloved only child.
$580 “This king was also of a loving nature and quite compassionate, with a love for beings, and wanted deeply to perform acts of charity. He began to give gifts and make merit. To those who wished for food he gave food. To those who wished for something to drink he gave something to drink. To those who wished for clothes he gave clothes. To those who wished for adornments he gave adornments. To those who wished for bedding and seats he gave bedding and seats. To those who wished for mounts he gave mounts. To those who wished for other goods, he gave other goods, and to the sick and to homes for the sick he provided everything that they needed, appointing healers and attendants.
$581 “He served the ill and the orphaned. [122.a] He prepared a great deal of food and drink and made gifts of it to the creatures that flew through the sky, dwelt in the water, or made their homes in the fields. ‘From this day forth, to all I shall give all,’ he promised. ‘I shall set the whole world on the path of the ten virtuous actions.’ After they died, their embrace of the path of the ten virtuous actions was cause for the greater part of those beings to take birth among the gods, until they began to fill all the gods’ residences.
$582 “Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, ‘What is this? Is someone practicing to attain the state of Indra, or perhaps to attain the state of Brahmā?’ Śakra, King of the Gods, looked out, and saw that there was one who was practicing to attain unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. He thought, ‘I will go for a time and see for myself whether he is of firm resolve. If this being’s resolve is firm, I shall worship him. If this being’s resolve is not firm, I shall steady him.’ With this in mind, Śakra, King of the Gods, emanated in the form of a rākṣasa, sat on the canopy above King Śibi’s house, and spoke half a verse:
$583 “ ‘Sad that once formed, nothing can last, But only arise and expire . . . .’
$584 “With that, Śakra, King of the Gods, in his nonhuman guise fell silent.
“Now King Śibi heard what Śakra, King of the Gods, in nonhuman guise had said, and when he heard it he thought, ‘This alone is the foundation of nirvāṇa and opens the gate of dependent origination. This alone shows the path to unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment.’
$585 “King Śibi saw Śakra, King of the Gods, in nonhuman guise [122.b] sitting on the canopy above his house, and when he saw him he rose quickly, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed with palms pressed together toward Śakra, King of the Gods, in nonhuman guise, and said, ‘Speak, my friend, complete the verse. I will be your disciple, and listen.’
$586 “ ‘What good is it, if you’re my disciple?’ Śakra, King of the Gods, asked. ‘Tormented by hunger and thirst, I sit and speak in desperate uncertainty of what I shall eat.’
“ ‘Speak, my friend, complete the verse,’ the Bodhisattva urged him. ‘I shall give you your fill of food.’
$587 “Śakra, King of the Gods, in nonhuman guise replied, ‘My friend, how can you give me my fill? Being what they are, my food and drink will be difficult for you to give.’
“ ‘What are your food and drink?’ the Bodhisattva asked.
“ ‘I eat the flesh and drink the warm blood of humans freshly killed,’ he replied.
$588 “Thereupon the Bodhisattva thought, ‘That kind of flesh and blood can’t be had without killing. I can’t do harm to another being for the sake of a pithy teaching.’ So he said, ‘If you can eat and drink my flesh and blood, my friend, I can give you all the more. Therefore, speak, and complete the verse. For your pithy teaching I shall give you my own flesh and blood.’
$589 “Thereupon Śakra, King of the Gods spoke, completing the verse:
“ ‘Sad that once formed, nothing can last, But only arise and expire. Sad that once born, all things must cease. Their pacification is bliss.’
$590 “In reverence the Bodhisattva pondered the entire verse, and for a long time he practiced reciting it, thinking, ‘This is the foundation of the city of nirvāṇa and the gate of dependent arising. [123.a] It is the path that leads to the city of nirvāṇa, the path by which every totally and complete awakened buddha has gone forth.’ Taking up a very sharp knife, he said, ‘An offering for your pithy teaching, my friend,’ and to Śakra, King of the Gods, in nonhuman guise he handed flesh cut from his side.
$591 “ ‘My friend, will this satisfy you?’ he asked.
“ ‘No,’ came the reply. ‘It will not.’
“So he handed him flesh cut from his other side, and in the same way flesh cut from his shoulders and cut from all over his body, asking, ‘My friend, will this satisfy you?’
$592 “ ‘No,’ came the reply. ‘It will not.’ Finally the Bodhisattva thought, ‘The time is here at last to completely let go of my whole body,’ and he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, ‘By this root of virtue, may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without any guide at all, without anyone to show them the way—a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.’ And he said in verse:
$593 “ ‘By this great gift may I become A self-arisen buddha for all the worlds. May I rescue and liberate the many beings Not liberated by the victorious lords who came before me.’
$594 “Having thus prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, he said, ‘My friend, you may do as you please with my body.’#238
No sooner had the Bodhisattva conceived the spirit of enlightenment than the earth quaked six different ways. The gods who lived in the sky let fall a rain of flowers and said, ‘How good, friend, [123.b] how good it is. What a magnificent austerity you undertook!’
$595 “Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, ‘This bodhisattva took on extraordinary hardship. I can restore his body, but first I must finish measuring his commitment.’
So he asked the Bodhisattva, ‘My friend, are you not even a little unhappy to cut away your own#239 flesh and to sever your sinews and veins?’
$596 “ ‘Oh, I’m not the least bit unhappy to cut away my flesh or to sever my sinews and veins,’ the Bodhisattva replied. ‘I am compelled to undergo this suffering by compassion for beings born as hell beings, animals, or anguished spirits.’
“Śakra, King of the Gods, in nonhuman guise scoffed at him, ‘Who could believe your words, my friend?’
$597 “ ‘With an invocation of the truth, I shall bring you to believe them,’ the Bodhisattva replied.
“ ‘If your invocation is true, may your body be as it was before,’ said Śakra. And just as he said this, the Bodhisattva stated, ‘If it is true that I’m not the least bit unhappy to cut away my flesh and to sever my sinews and veins, and that I am compelled to undergo this suffering by compassion for beings born as hell beings, animals, or anguished spirits, then by these words of truth may my body be restored.’ As soon as the Bodhisattva said this, his body was restored.
$598 “Śakra, King of the Gods, rejoiced at this sight. [124.a] His guise disappeared, and he returned to his natural body. He bowed down at the feet of the Bodhisattva and told him, ‘It was not with ill intent that I made such trouble for you. I made such trouble for you to spur you on. With such joyous effort as you possess, you are certain to fully, completely awaken into total and complete enlightenment. When you do, please remember me.’ Then Śakra, King of the Gods, asked forgiveness of the bodhisattva, and disappeared on the spot.
$599 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was King Śibi then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. At that time I was a teacher of pithy teachings, and there I wished to hear a pithy teaching. Having become the Tathāgata, now as well, and in the same way, how would I not be a teacher of pithy teachings, and not wish to hear a pithy teaching myself? Why? Because, monks, it was I who first taught this Dharma.”
The Second Story of King Śibi
$600 The opening rationale and prior cause are the same as above.
$601 “Śakra, King of the Gods asked the Bodhisattva, ‘What good is it if you’re my disciple? I have told you to harm yourself in a certain way. If you dare do it, afterward I shall tell the verse to you.’
“ ‘Tell me the verse first, my friend,” the Bodhisattva urged him. ‘Then I shall harm myself in all the ways in which you have told me. But give me the verse in its entirety, my friend.’
$602 “At this, Śakra, King of the Gods, told the entire verse to the Bodhisattva. Then the Bodhisattva drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, and bowed toward Śakra, King of the Gods, in nonhuman guise, with palms pressed together. [124.b] After he had pondered the entire verse, and had practiced reciting it for a long time, he lay down and began to crush himself between two wooden boards—each board driven through with a thousand nails, each nail four fingers in length. As he lay there he began to pray for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, ‘By this root of virtue, may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without any guide at all, without anyone to show them the way—a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha.’ And then he said in verse:
$603 “ ‘By this great gift may I become A self-arisen buddha for all the worlds. May I rescue and liberate the many beings Not liberated by the victorious lords who came before me.’
$604 “Then the Bodhisattva again crushed himself between the two boards, and as blood began gushing out from all over his body, the earth quaked six different ways. The gods who lived in the sky let fall a rain of flowers, exclaiming, ‘How good it is!’ ”
$605 The rest should be told as in the preceding story, beginning with the invocation of the truth on up to and including the restoration of their bodies.
Kauśāmbī
$606 When the Blessed Buddha was staying in the garden of the householder Ghoṣila in Kauśāmbī, there lived a certain Kauśāmbī monk who was a wicked and very powerful holder of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā. He had many adherents#240 and attendants, and many other monk friends who were also nothing but wicked, powerful holders of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā, with many adherents and attendants themselves.
$607 There was also a certain Vaiśālī monk who had come to Kauśāmbī [125.a] and was likewise a wicked, powerful holder of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā, with many adherents and attendants, and many other monk friends who were also nothing but wicked, powerful holders of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā, with many adherents and attendants themselves.
$608 While all of them were in retreat during the rains, they had agreed, “If any one of us sees that the water containers are completely empty, with no water whatsoever, that person should fill them, or else inform the one in charge of the utensils. Furthermore, not filling them or not informing the one in charge of the utensils will be cause for punishment.”
$609 As those who were staying there during the rains were resolving a discussion, they became embroiled in argument and looked for opportunities to harm one another.
At that time a certain householder invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks to take their food at his house, so the Blessed One set out for the householder’s home accompanied by many of the monks, and eventually arrived at the householder’s home.
$610 After the Blessed One left, the Vaiśālī monk went to bathe, and after he had washed and rinsed, he saw that there was no more than a little water left in the water container. He thought, “The monks have all already gone. No one is going to come here to bathe now, so there’s no need to fill the water container or to inform the person in charge of the utensils.” So he departed, leaving no more than a little water there.
$611 Not long after he had gone, the Kauśāmbī monk came and was preparing to bathe when he saw that there was no more than a little water left. Since he had also seen the Vaiśālī monk bathe and depart, he thought, “That monk is doing one of two things—he’s either [125.b] filling up the water container or informing the person in charge of the utensils,” and he waited there.
$612 Some of the disciples who were living with him asked, “Preceptor, why are you waiting here, when all the other monks have gone?”
“I wish to bathe,” he replied. “The Vaiśālī monk bathed and departed, so he’s gone either to fill the water container or to inform the person in charge of the utensils.”
$613 “Preceptor, he left with his attendants,” they said. “You shouldn’t wait here.”
He showed the water container to the monks. “Look here—do you think I can bathe and rinse with just this much water?”
“Preceptor,” they said, “in a little while, claim that there is no water. Then we will support you and take your side.” And then they departed.
$614 The Vaiśālī monk began to feel some regret, and he said to some of the disciples who were living with him, “Oh no, after I bathed and rinsed off, there was no more than a little water in the water container, and I left it like that and departed. We have an agreement among the saṅgha that you have to either fill the water container yourself or inform the person in charge of the utensils. I didn’t fill it myself, nor did I inform the person in charge of the utensils, and now I’ve come back here. But maybe now some other monk will want to bathe and rinse.”
$615 They said, “Preceptor, in a little while, claim that there was water there. Then we will support you and take your side.” Then they departed, and after he finished his food, he went outside.
The Kauśāmbī monks thought, “The Vaiśālī monk has violated the agreement made among the saṅgha. Since he committed the infraction, we#241 will make him confess the infraction.” So they prepared a seat [126.a] and sounded the gong, and the entire saṅgha assembled.
$616 When the Kauśāmbī monk accused him, the Vaiśālī monk replied, “There was water inside.”
“Do you think I can bathe and rinse with that little water?” retorted the other.
They took action to sequester the monk for his shameless denial. The Vaiśālī monks interdicted#242 that action , and performed a separate poṣadha purification ceremony of their own. This was cause for further strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, so in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention they remained.
$617 The Blessed One sent for the sequestered monk, the disciples of the sequestered monk, and the disciples of the disciples of the sequestered monk, and asked them, “Monks, is it true you are engaged in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention?”
“Yes, Blessed One, it’s true,” they replied.
$618 The Blessed One admonished them, “Monks, do not remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention. Monks, know that if you remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, virtues will decrease, and thereby not increase. Monks, know that if you do not remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, virtues will increase, and thereby not decrease.
$619 “Furthermore, monks, a sequestered monk must do the following: If a sequestered monk is a wicked, powerful holder of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā, with many adherents and attendants, and his many other monk friends are likewise nothing but wicked, powerful holders of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā, with many adherents and attendants, he may think, ‘They carelessly accuse me and remember things carelessly. [126.b] Therefore I shall not pay heed to their grievances as I should. They are sequestering me from view. I am being sequestered on account of egregious, intransigent, destructive views,#243 which will be cause for strife, reproof, conflict, and contention in the saṅgha.’ Assuming such, if the accused monk still makes amends as he should, all will be well. But by the same token, if he does not make amends, it will be an infraction.”
$620 Then the Blessed One dismissed the sequestered monk, the disciples of the sequestered monk, and the disciples of the disciples of the sequestered monk, and sent for the monks who had sequestered him, the disciples of the monks who had sequestered him, and the disciples of the disciples of the monks who had sequestered him. He asked them, “Monks, is it true you are engaged in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention?”
“Yes, Blessed One, it’s true,” they replied.
$621 The Blessed One admonished them also, “Monks, do not remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention. Monks, know that if you remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, virtues will decrease, and thereby not increase. Monks, know that if you do not remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, virtues will increase, and thereby not decrease.
$622 “Monks, the monk who has sequestered another monk must do the following: If a sequestering monk is a wicked, powerful holder of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā, with many adherents and attendants, and his many other monk friends are likewise nothing but wicked, powerful holders of sūtra, vinaya, and mātṛkā, with many adherents and attendants themselves, he may think, ‘I have accused him carelessly and remembered things carelessly, and he has not paid heed to that grievance as he should, [127.a] so I have sequestered him from view. I sequestered him on account of egregious, intransigent, destructive views, which will be cause for strife, reproof, conflict, and contention in the saṅgha.’ Assuming such, he must not make careless accusations. He must not recall things so carelessly. If he makes a careless accusation, it will be an infraction.”
$623 The Blessed One instructed them further, “Also, if the poṣadha purification ceremony still does not ameliorate the strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, it should be mentioned to the Blessed One as the occasion arises.”
Then the Blessed One sent for the sequestered monk, the disciples of the sequestered monk, and the disciples of the disciples of the sequestered monk, and said to them, “Monks, I have instructed you not to remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention. Is it true that the poṣadha purification ceremony still has not ameliorated the strife, reproof, conflict, and contention?”
“Yes, Blessed One, it’s true,” they replied.
$624 “Monks, do not engage in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention. Monks, if you remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, then whether you perform the poṣadha purification ceremony, the lifting of restrictions ceremony,#244 an act whose second member is a motion, or an act whose fourth member is a motion, all those acts would be interdicted, and they must be ratified.
$625 “Why? Because, monks, you remain apart from the others, and they remain apart from you as well. Monks, there are two types of remaining apart: one who remains apart of his own accord, and one who lives separately by consensus of the saṅgha.
$626 “Monks, what does it mean then to remain apart of one’s own accord? In this case, monks, to remain apart of one’s own accord means to knowingly claim that a position that does not accord with the Dharma is a position that does accord with the Dharma. [127.b]
$627 “What does it mean to remain apart by consensus of the saṅgha? In this case, monks, to remain apart by consensus of the saṅgha refers to when the saṅgha has sequestered a monk out of view, and the sequestering is on account of egregious, intransigent, destructive views.
$628 “Monks, there are two types of remaining together: one who remains on his own, and the saṅgha remaining together as the Dharma specifies.
“What do we mean by one who remains on his own? In this case, monks, one who remains on his own refers to a monk who knowingly claims that a position that accords with the Dharma is one that does not accord with the Dharma.
$629 “What do we mean by the saṅgha remaining together as the Dharma specifies? In this case, monks, the saṅgha remaining together as the Dharma specifies refers to when the saṅgha is going to sequester a monk out of sight, and does the sequestering on account of egregious, intransigent, destructive views.”
$630 Then the Blessed One dismissed the sequestered monk, the disciples of the sequestered monk, and the disciples of the disciples of the sequestered monk, and sent for the monks who had sequestered him, the disciples of the monks who had sequestered him, and the disciples of the disciples of the monks who had sequestered him.
$631 “Monks,” he said to them, “I have instructed you not to remain in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention. Is it true that the poṣadha purification ceremony has still not ameliorated the strife, reproof, conflict, and contention?” When they replied, “Yes, Blessed One, it’s true,” he gave the previous instruction just as before, up through the saṅgha remaining together as the Dharma specifies. The Blessed One gave them this instruction, but they remained in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention.
$632 Then a certain householder [128.a] invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks to take their food at his house, so those monks went there. The Blessed One told the monk in charge of provisions, “Bring my food here.”
$633 Now there are five reasons the blessed buddhas make the monks in charge of provisions bring them food: (1) they wish to meditate, (2) they wish to teach Dharma to the gods, (3) they wish to visit with a sick person, (4) they wish to survey the sleeping quarters, or (5) they wish to give the fundamental precepts to disciples.
On this occasion, the Blessed One did so because he wished to give the fundamental precepts of the monastic discipline.
$634 After he sent the monk in charge of provisions to bring the food, many of the monks who had come to the house began to engage in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention as they sat in their seats. Remaining in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, they continued performing improper actions of body and improper actions of speech and they eventually began striking each other.
$635 After they went to take their food and had done so, they approached the Blessed One, touching their heads to his feet and taking a seat at one side. The Blessed One asked the monks who had taken food, “Monks, has the saṅgha’s good food contented you?”
$636 “Yes, Lord, it has,” they replied. “Though it is good the saṅgha of monks is contented with good food, Lord, still many of the monks who came here began to engage in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention. Remaining in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, they continued to perform improper actions of body and improper actions of speech and eventually began striking each other.”
$637 Then the Blessed One took his food, [128.b] washed his feet outside the monastery, and entered to monastery to sit in meditation. In the afternoon the Blessed One rose from his meditation, took his seat amid the saṅgha of monks, and asked them, “Monks, is it true that those of you who went to the house remained in strife, reproof, conflict, and contention, continuing to perform improper actions of body and improper actions of speech until after a while you began striking each other?”
“Yes, Lord, it’s true,” they replied.
$638 The Blessed One then declared to the saṅgha of monks, “I shall make rules that govern a group of monks that goes to a householder’s home in a separate group. A group of monks who separate themselves in a group must give up all bases for dispute. Those monks who remained neutral should neither associate nor live together with the group of monks that separate themselves in a group even a night or a day or a morning or an evening—not in the temple, nor in the monastery, nor outside the villages. They should neither walk on the same path, nor accompany one another on the same path. They should not gesture. They should not speak. Those who remain neutral, and perfectly apprehend the cause of the dispute, will be able to make peace in accord with the Dharma and the Vinaya. In order to protect the doctrine of your teacher, if you are able to reach an agreement and by some pure means to make peace as the Dharma and Vinaya specify, then let your accord put to rest the cause of the dispute.”
$639 This concludes Part Ten of The Hundred Deeds.
$640 This concludes "The Hundred Deeds."
