$1 1. The Story of Kacaṅkalā 2. The Story of Kaineya 3. The Betrothal of the Bride: Two Stories 4. Cuts: Two Stories 5. Being Devoured 6. The Story of Nandaka 7. Chunks of Meat 8. The One Who Thought He Saw His Son 9. The Farmer 10. Death 11. A Story about Kokālika 12. The Tired Man 13. Morsel
The Story of Kacaṅkalā
$2 When the Blessed One was staying in Otalā Forest in Otalā, one morning he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, went for alms in the villages of Otalā. At that time there was a certain woman who had taken a pot and gone out for water. From a distance, she saw that the Blessed One was beautiful, pleasing, his senses were at peace, his heart at peace, and his mind absolutely serene. He was as shining and radiant as a golden pillar.
$3 What is more, she perceived the Blessed One to be her own son. Laying her pot aside, she spread out her hands and approached the Blessed One, saying, “My son! My son!” But as she went to take the Blessed One in her arms, the monks hindered her from doing so. The Blessed One corrected the monks, saying, “Monks, do not hinder this woman. [120.a] Monks, if you don’t let this woman take the Tathāgata in her arms, she will spew warm blood from her mouth and die.” The monks did not hinder her any further, and, after holding the Blessed One in her arms, she sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$4 The Blessed One directly apprehended her thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, and nature, and taught her the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the woman destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where she sat.
$5 Having seen the truths, she rose from her seat, drew down the right shoulder of her upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms together, and implored him, “Blessed One, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$6 The Blessed One presented her to Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī, who led her to go forth as a novice, conferred on her full ordination, and instructed her. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, she manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, her mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of her hands as like space itself. She became cool like wet sandalwood. Her insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. She achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. She had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. She became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods. [120.b]
$7 Then the Blessed One spoke of her greatness, saying, “Monks, this is the nun Kacaṅkalā—among my listener nuns, she is foremost of those who interpret the sūtras.”
The monks requested the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why thousands of women have seen the Blessed One, but never has anyone run to him from a distance like that.”
“Monks,” explained the Blessed One, “Kacaṅkalā was my mother for five hundred lifetimes. She saw me and ran to me because of these habitual tendencies.”
$8 “Lord, if she was the Blessed One’s mother for five hundred lifetimes, why is she not your mother now?”
“Monks, there are two causes and two conditions for her not being my mother now,” the Blessed One replied. “First, Mahā­māyādevī prayed, ‘Oh, but let me become the mother of the Buddha!’ And I myself, in distress, also prayed, ‘May she who is my mother, in the future not be my mother.’ ”
$9 “What distress did she cause the Blessed One?” they asked.
“Monks,” the Blessed One replied, “bodhisattvas delight in renunciation and love to give, and she continually created obstacles to my renunciation and charity. This is why she caused me distress.”
$10 The monks asked the Blessed One, “Lord, what action did the nun Kacaṅkalā take that ripened into her first being poor and then going forth only in her old age?”
“Bodhisattvas delight in renunciation [121.a] and love to give,” the Blessed One explained, “and for a certain number of my lives she obstructed my renunciation and charity. That act ripened into her now being poor, and going forth only in her old age.”
$11 “Lord, what action did the nun Kacaṅkalā take that ripened into the Blessed One declaring her the foremost among those who interpret the sūtras, and that she pleased and did not displease the Blessed One, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of her prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$12 “Lord, where did she make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, she went forth in his teaching, and the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa commended her preceptor as foremost among those who interpret the sūtras.
$13 “She practiced pure conduct all her life, and at the time of her death she prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. By this root of virtue, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. [121.b] Just as he commended my preceptor as foremost among those who interpret the sūtras, may the peerless Śākyamuni, King of the Śākyas, likewise commend me as foremost among those who interpret the sūtras.’
$14 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that nun then is none other than Kacaṅkalā now. At that time she practiced pure conduct all her life, and at the time of her death she prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Just as he commended my preceptor as foremost among those who interpret the sūtras, may the peerless Śākyamuni, King of the Śākyas, likewise commend me as foremost among those who interpret the sūtras.’
$15 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that she has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship, and that I commended her as foremost among those who interpret the sūtras.”
The Story of Kaineya
$16 When the Blessed One was staying at the Domicile of Ghosts in the Adumā region, one morning he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, went for alms in Adumā village. After receiving his alms in Adumā village, he ate his meal, [122.a] and since he no longer took food in the later part of the day, he washed his feet outside the Domicile of Ghosts, and entered the grounds to meditate. In the meantime there was a thunderstorm, and lightning struck in Adumā. The people there were chattering anxiously about how it killed four bulls and two brothers: one a householder, the other a peasant farmer.
$17 As evening fell, the Blessed One rose from his meditation and emerged from the Domicile of Ghosts and lingered there, walking among the shadows on the grounds of the Domicile of Ghosts. Thereupon one of the great many people there got up and walked toward the Blessed One. After approaching him, he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and fell in behind him, that he might also walk where the Blessed One had walked.
$18 The Blessed One asked the man, “My friend! What are the people of Adumā village chattering about so anxiously?”
“Lord,” said the man, “there was a thunderstorm, and lightning struck in Adumā. Everyone is chattering anxiously about how it killed four bulls and two brothers: one a householder, the other a peasant farmer. Did the Blessed One not hear the thunder roar and the lightning strike?”
$19 “No, I didn’t hear it,” the Blessed One replied.
“How is that?” the man asked. “Was the Blessed One sleeping?”
The Blessed One said, “No, I was not asleep at all.”
$20 “If the Blessed One has faculties of perception and wasn’t asleep,” he said, “then how did he not hear the thunder roar and the lightning strike?”
“I have faculties of perception, and I was not sleeping,” the Blessed One replied, “but I did not hear the thunder roar nor the lightning strike.”
$21 Now the man had to think this over. “Hmm,” he thought, “although he has faculties of perception and was not sleeping, still he did not hear the thunder roar nor the lightning strike. How wonderful that the Blessed One can abide so peacefully in meditation.” [122.b] This made the man very happy, and in his happiness he made offerings to the Blessed One.
$22 At that time in the forests of the Adumā region there lived a certain sage named Kaineya who was clairvoyant and had a retinue of five hundred. Not far away in another forest lived his sister’s son, a sage by the name of Śaila, who also had a retinue of five hundred. Both sages also spent time on the banks of Lake Mandākinī, traveling there now and again to spend the day.
$23 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$24 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, [123.a] shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$25 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$26 The Blessed One thought, “If I give a Dharma teaching to the four great kings there, I will tame the sages Kaineya and Śaila, so I will give a Dharma teaching to the four great kings there on the banks of Lake Mandākinī and tame the sages Kaineya and Śaila with little difficulty.” The Blessed One then had a thought about the world:#93 “The four great kings can understand my intention, and when they understand it and think, ‘The Blessed One intends to give a Dharma teaching to us on the banks of Lake Mandākinī,’ they will agree to attend.”
$27 And indeed, the four great kings directly apprehended the Blessed One’s intention and dispatched their servants, instructing them, “Go now and prepare a seat on the banks of Lake Mandākinī. Scatter different kinds of flowers on the ground, and sprinkle it with fragrant water. Look after the sages Kaineya and Śaila, for it would not be right if harm came to them at the hands of humans, nonhuman spirits, or rākṣasas.”
$28 “As you wish,” the servants of the four great kings replied, and they traveled to Lake Mandākinī, where they prepared a seat, scattered different kinds of flowers on the ground, and sprinkled it with fragrant water.
$29 Kaineya, seeing that the servants of the four great kings had prepared a seat on the banks of Lake Mandākinī, scattered different kinds of flowers on the ground, and sprinkled it with fragrant water, asked them, “Why are you here making all these preparations?” [123.b]
$30 “We are preparing a seat for the Blessed One, for he wishes to teach the Dharma to the four great kings,” they replied.
“What! Can’t I teach them Dharma?” Kaineya asked, to which the servants of the four great kings replied, “The ascetic Gautama will teach them the Dharma, not you.”
$31 “Then why are you following me all about?” he asked.
“A large number of servants and attendants are going to accompany them, so we are looking after you for fear you might be harmed.”
“What? Is it me alone you look after?” Kaineya demanded. “Or do you look after the ascetic Gautama as well?”
$32 The servants of the four great kings replied, “We do not look after the ascetic Gautama. He himself protects the world, including the gods.”
Kaineya thought, “The ascetic Gautama must be a person of great miracles and great power, if even the gods strive to worship him in such a way.”
The Blessed One disappeared from the Adumā region and traveled to the banks of Lake Mandākinī, where he took his place on the seat prepared for him.
$33 The great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra and the thousands upon thousands of gandharvas who serve him then filled the fronts of their long shirts with divine lotus, blue lotus, white water lily, and white lotus flowers and went to see the Blessed One. When they arrived, they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, scattered the divine lotus, blue lotus, white water lily, and white lotus flowers over him, and circumambulated the Blessed One seven times before taking their seats in the east, facing the Blessed One to the west.
$34 Then the great king Virūḍhaka and the thousands upon thousands of kumbhāṇḍas who serve him all filled the fronts of their long shirts with jewels and went to see the Blessed One. When they arrived, they scattered jewels over the Blessed One, [124.a] touched their heads to his feet, and took their seats in the south, facing the Blessed One to the north.
$35 Then the great king Virūpākṣa and the thousands upon thousands of nāgas who serve him all filled the fronts of their long shirts with pearls and went to see the Blessed One. When they arrived they scattered pearls over the Blessed One, touched their heads to his feet, and took their seats in the west, facing the Blessed One to the east.
$36 Then the great king Vaiśravaṇa and the thousands upon thousands of yakṣas who serve him all filled the fronts of their long shirts with gold and silver, and went to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival, they scattered gold and silver over the Blessed One, touched their heads to his feet, and took their seats in the north, facing the Blessed One to the south.
$37 Now since two of the great kings were from barbaric outlying regions, and two were from central lands, the Blessed One thought, “If I give a Dharma teaching in the language of the central lands, two of them will understand what I am saying, and two of them will not, but if I give a Dharma teaching in the language of the barbaric outlying regions, still only two of them will understand what I am saying, and two of them will not. So, I will teach it to each of them individually.”
$38 With this thought he said to the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, “Great King, the separation from the body, the abating of sensations, the cessation of perceptions, the allaying of formations, and the disappearance of consciousness is itself the end of suffering.” When he gave this Dharma teaching, the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra and the many thousands of gods who belong to the same class as him achieved the Dharma vision that is free from dust and stainless with regard to phenomena. [124.b]
$39 After that the Blessed One said to the great king Virūḍhaka, “Great King, when you see, you should have the wisdom to merely see. When you listen, you should have the wisdom to merely hear. When your intelligence begins to differentiate, you should have the wisdom to merely differentiate. And regarding consciousness, you should have the wisdom of mere consciousness. This itself is the end of suffering.” When he gave this Dharma teaching, the great king Virūḍhaka and the many thousands of gods who belong to the same class as him achieved the Dharma vision that is free from dust and stainless with regard to phenomena.
$40 Then the Blessed One said to the great king Virūpākṣa, “E ne me ne dab phu da dab phu,” which means precisely, “This itself is the end of suffering.” When he gave this Dharma teaching, the great king Virūpākṣa and the many thousands of gods who belong to the same class as him achieved the Dharma vision that is free from dust and stainless with regard to phenomena.
$41 Then the Blessed One said to the great king Vaiśravaṇa, “Mā śā tu śā sang śāmā sarva datra viratrī,” which means precisely, “This itself is the end of suffering.” When he gave this Dharma teaching the great king Vaiśravaṇa and the many thousands of gods who belong to the same class as him achieved the Dharma vision that is free from dust and stainless with regard to phenomena.
$42 The four great kings perceived the truths,#94 discovered the truths, realized the truths, and fathomed the truths to their very depths, overcoming whatever doubt or hesitation they had. Of their own accord, completely unprompted, and fearless on account of the truths their teacher had shown them, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and said, “Lord, we [125.a] have been inducted into the Dharma, we have been inducted into the Dharma indeed. We seek refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. We wish to take refuge and the fundamental precepts.”
$43 The Blessed One replied, “My friends, what you have said is very good.” At this the four great kings rejoiced, praised all that the Blessed One had said, touched their heads to his feet, and took leave of the Blessed One.
$44 After they had left the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “Lord, what actions did these four great kings take that ripened into two of them being renowned as the lords of the central lands, and two of the barbaric outlying regions, and that they pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
$45 “Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there were two nāga kings named Āśvāsa and Mahā­śvāsa who lived on the slopes of Mount Sumeru. Two bird kings lived there as well, the garuḍas Sound and Great Sound.
$46 “Afraid of the two garuḍas, the two nāgas fled, traveling down to the base of the universe, where they remained. The nāga kings Āśvāsa and Mahā­śvāsa liked the doctrine of the totally and completed awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, so both went for refuge and took the fundamental precepts. Having [125.b] taken refuge and the fundamental precepts, the nāga kings were no longer vulnerable to the garuḍas, so they emerged from the waters of the great ocean completely at ease.
$47 “The garuḍas Sound and Great Sound saw the two nāga kings emerge from the waters of the great ocean completely at ease. They were overwhelmed at the sight of them and were unable to harm them by force, for striking at them was like smacking into Mount Sumeru. ‘Before you were afraid of us and fled, down to the base of the universe—so how is it that you are now so completely at ease, and that we are unable to harm you?’ they asked them.
$48 “ ‘We’ve taken refuge and the fundamental precepts from the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa,’ the two nāgas replied. ‘That’s why we are no longer vulnerable to you.’
$49 “ ‘Who is this one you call “Buddha”?’ the garuḍas asked. The nāgas described the Buddha to them in detail, and immediately after hearing about him they too were filled with the greatest admiration for the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Joyful, they too went to see the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.
$50 “They took refuge and the fundamental precepts and acted in accord with the nāgas by being friends with them, coexisting with them, and going for refuge and maintaining the fundamental precepts together with them.
$51 “At the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘We have gone forth like this in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all our lives. By this root of virtue, wherever we are born, may we be renowned as lords of those regions. May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely [126.a] awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$52 “O monks, what do you think? The ones who were the nāga kings Āśvāsa and Mahā­śvāsa then are none other than the great kings Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Virūḍhaka of the central lands. Those who were the garuḍa kings Sound and Great Sound then are none other than the great kings Virūpākṣa and Vaiśravaṇa of the barbaric outlying regions. At that time they went for refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts all their lives, and at the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever we are born, may we be renowned as lords of those regions. May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’ Those acts ripened into their current renown as lords among the gods of the Abodes of the Four Great Kings.
$53 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$54 Kaineya was standing nearby as the Blessed One taught the Dharma to the four great kings and told of their past actions, and he could hear every word. As soon he heard it all, he experienced a surge of joy toward the Blessed One, approached him, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One [126.b] directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly.
$55 When he heard it, Kaineya destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat. After seeing the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and implored him, “I would like to request that the Blessed One and the saṅgha of monks remain here in the region this morning. Please accept the beverages I shall prepare for you when it is no longer proper for you to eat.” The Blessed One assented by his silence.
$56 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, Kaineya prepared eight different beverages—apple juice, banana juice, juniper juice, fig juice, udumbara juice, wild date palm berry juice, buckwheat juice, and grape juice—and went to present them to the Blessed One. When he arrived he implored the Blessed One, “Lord, the great sages of the past have sung the praises of these eight different beverages, extolling their virtues and speaking highly of them. I implore the Blessed One to please accept them out of compassion for us.” Out of compassion the Blessed One accepted the eight different beverages from Kaineya.
$57 The Blessed One then addressed the monks, saying, “Monks, I permit the monks, nuns, and female and male novices to drink all eight of these different beverages—be they filtered or unfiltered, clear or unclear, turbid or settled, of good color or not of good color— [127.a] at the proper times of day, but not at improper times. Of these eight different beverages, those filtered with cloth, clear, good in color, settled, and free of residue may be imbibed at improper times as well.”
$58 The sage Kaineya bowed to the Blessed One with his palms pressed together and beseeched him, “Lord, please allow me to request you and the saṅgha of monks to take your food at my house tomorrow,” and the Blessed One assented by his silence. Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, Kaineya then asked the Blessed One, “In that case, Lord, may I request that you all stay here in the forest tonight?”
$59 The Blessed One replied, “If it pleases you, Kaineya, we shall.” The Blessed One then disappeared from the banks of Lake Mandākinī and appeared seated in the forest with the saṅgha of monks, not far from where Kaineya lived.
$60 Early in the morning, before sunrise, Kaineya called to his young brahmins, “Noble ones, get up! Get up, gentle ones, get up! Attend to your reception room duties—split wood, make a fire, cook up the rice, prepare the vegetables, and make fried bread!” Kaineya was not the only one staying there that night. Śaila was there as well, and he heard Kaineya calling out to the young brahmins early in the morning before sunrise, “Noble ones, get up! Get up, gentle ones, get up! Attend to your reception room duties—split wood, make a fire, cook up the rice, prepare the vegetables, and make fried bread!” [127.b]
$61 When he heard this he thought, “What is this sage doing, sending off a bride to be married? Or is he about to receive a bride, perhaps? If not, he must be hosting foreign visitors, or craftsmen, or a group of men, or perhaps the king and his retinue.” Wondering about this, Śaila asked Kaineya, “What are you doing, sage, sending off a bride to be married? Or are you about to receive a bride, perhaps? If not, are you hosting foreign visitors, or craftsmen, or a group of men, or perhaps the king and his retinue?”
$62 “I am neither sending off a bride to be married, nor receiving a bride, nor hosting foreign visitors, craftsmen, or a group of men, nor hosting the king and his retinue,” replied Kaineya. “Rather, today I have invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for a meal.”
$63 When Śaila heard the name Buddha, a sound unlike any he had heard before, it gave him goosebumps, and filled him with joy. Śaila asked Kaineya, “Sage, who is this one you call ‘Buddha’?”
$64 “Sage,” Kaineya replied, “near the Himalayas, on the banks of the Ganges, not far from the dwelling of Kapila, a child was born to the Śākyas. The brahmin soothsayers and augurs made this prediction about him: ‘If he remains here at home, he will become a universal monarch, but if he shaves his head and face and dons the colorful robes of the holy, and if with nothing short of perfect faith he goes forth from home to live as a mendicant, then he will be renowned throughout the world as a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha.’ He shaved his head and face and donned the colorful religious robes, and with nothing short of perfect faith went forth from home to live as a mendicant until he awakened unto unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. This, O sage, is the one we call Buddha.”
$65 “Sage, who are those you call ‘saṅgha’?”
“O sage, [128.a] among them are wise warriors, wise brahmins, wise householders, and wise mendicants as well. They are all those who have gone forth to follow the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the totally and completely awakened Buddha. These, sage, are the ones I call the saṅgha. Today I have invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for a meal.”
$66 Śaila asked Kaineya, “Where is the Blessed One now, sage?”
“In the forests of the Adumā region, sage,” replied Kaineya. “If you wish to see him,
$67 “Brahmin, head to the beautiful forest, For that is where he is. There you shall see the Buddha, our guide, Holding court like a gandharva king.”
$68 Śaila heeded Kaineya’s advice and went to the forest to see the Blessed One. There he saw the Blessed One from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like tongues of fire stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart.
$69 He saw the Blessed Buddha, and the sight of him filled him with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$70 After he saw the Blessed Buddha in this way, he approached him, touched his head to his feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and [128.b] nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, the sage Śaila destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where he sat.
$71 After seeing the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and made this request of the Blessed One: “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$72 “Sage, have you consulted your retinue?” asked the Blessed One.
“No, Lord,” replied Śaila, “I have not.”
The Blessed One replied, “In that case, sage, first consult your retinue. It is only fitting that a person like yourself, renowned by all and possessed of great merit, should do so.”
$73 So Śaila went to see his young brahmins, and when he arrived he informed them, “Young brahmins, I must let you know that I wish to practice the holy life in the presence of the Blessed One. What will you do now?”
“It is with your support, preceptor, that we have sought anything at all,” they replied. “Should the ascetic Gautama lead our preceptor to go forth, we will go forth as well.”
$74 “Young brahmins,” Śaila said, “if you are certain the time is right, then may it be so.”
Then Śaila went to see the Blessed One along with his five hundred devotees. When he arrived he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and then petitioned the Blessed One: “Lord, I have consulted my devotees, [129.a] and if permitted, Lord, we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$75 “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One replied. “Practice the holy life.”
As soon as the Blessed One had finished speaking there they stood, alms bowl and water pitcher in hand, with but a week’s worth of hair and beard, and with the deportment of a monk who had been ordained for one hundred years. As it is stated,
$76 Garbed in robes, with shaven heads, And senses stilled by Buddha’s will— From the very moment the One Thus Gone Spoke to them, saying, “Come, join me.”
$77 After preparing many good, wholesome foods that night, Kaineya rose in the morning, prepared seats, filled the water pots, and set them out. Then he sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him it was time for the midday meal: “Lord, the midday meal is upon us. Know that the time has come, Blessed One, and your presence is requested.”
$78 That morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, set out surrounded and attended by an assembly of monks, until they arrived at Kaineya’s reception room. There, the Blessed One took his place on the seat prepared for him and Kaineya by his own hand contented the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished.
$79 Kaineya saw that Śaila and his five hundred devotees had gone forth, and thus were also seated there. Recognizing this, he asked Śaila, “Sage, have you gone forth?” [129.b]
“Yes, my friend, I have gone forth.”
“Good!” Sage Kaineya said, “Very good! I too shall go forth after the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks have finished eating.”#95
$80 After contenting them by his own hand with many different kinds of good, wholesome food, proffering all that they wished, once he knew that the Blessed One had finished eating, his bowl had been taken away, and his hands washed, he drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$81 “Sage, have you consulted your retinue?” asked the Blessed One.
“No, Lord,” replied Kaineya, “I have not.”
“In that case, sage, first consult your retinue. It is only fitting that a person like yourself, renowned by all and possessed of great merit, should do so.”
$82 So Kaineya went to see his young brahmins, and when he arrived he informed them, “Young brahmins, I must let you know that I wish to practice the holy life in the presence of the Blessed One. What will you do now?”
$83 “It is with your support, preceptor, that we have sought anything at all,” they replied. “Should the ascetic Gautama lead our preceptor to go forth, we will go forth as well.”
“Young brahmins,” Kaineya said, “if you are [130.a] certain the time is right, then may it be so.”
$84 So Kaineya went to see the Blessed One along with his five hundred devotees, and when he arrived he touched his head to the feet of the Blessed One, and told him, “Lord, I have consulted my devotees, and if permitted, Lord, we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
“Come, join me, monks!” replied the Blessed One. “Practice the holy life.”
$85 As soon as the Blessed One had finished speaking there they stood, alms bowl and water pitcher in hand, with but a week’s worth of hair and beard, and with the deportment of a monk who had been ordained for one hundred years. As it is stated,
$86 Garbed in robes, with shaven heads, And senses stilled by Buddha’s will— From the very moment the One Thus Gone Spoke to them, saying, “Come, join me.”
$87 The Blessed One taught Śaila and Kaineya, and they cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship. He entrusted five hundred of their monks to Venerable Brāhmaṇa Mahā­kapina, two hundred and fifty to Venerable Śāriputra, and two hundred and fifty to Venerable Maudgalyāyana, and told them, “Give them your spiritual advice, and then instruct them to keep it in mind.”
“Yes, Blessed One,” they agreed. “We will do just as you have instructed.”
$88 Venerable Śāriputra, Venerable Maudgalyāyana, and Venerable Brāhmaṇa Mahā­kapina brought the monks to the banks of the Hiraṇyavatī River, [130.b] where they pledged to stay in retreat during the rains. While observing their pledge to stay in retreat during the rains, they were given instructions to ponder. Venerable Brāhmaṇa Kapina established his five hundred monks in arhatship, Venerable Maudgalyāyana established his two hundred and fifty monks in the resultant state of non-return, and Venerable Śāriputra established his two hundred and fifty monks in the resultant state of stream entry.
$89 Now there are two times of year when it is customary for the disciples of the Blessed Buddha to convene—in the middle of the summer months when the time comes for the summer retreat, and on the full moon of the last month of autumn. When the time comes in the middle of the summer months for the monks to enter the rains retreat, the monks receive instructions to ponder, and then they pledge to remain for the duration of the summer in mountain ravines, in mountain caves, in caves of reeds, on the plains, in charnel grounds, or in the forests. Then, when the full moon of the last month of autumn arrives, they give an account of all that they have realized, and they put questions to their superiors regarding all that they still do not understand.
$90 The five hundred in each of Venerable Śāriputra and Venerable Maudgalyāyana’s two retinues and the five hundred of Venerable Brāhmaṇa Mahā­kapina’s retinue all entered summer retreat. When three months had passed and their summer retreat was finished, they donned their lower garments and Dharma robes, and, carrying their alms bowls, they went to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, and took seats at one side. After they had taken their seats at one side, they gave the Blessed One an account of all that they had realized, and put questions to him regarding all that they still did not understand. The Blessed One gave them more advanced instructions to ponder, and they cast away all afflictive emotions with diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
$91 The monks asked the Blessed One, [131.a] “Lord, tell us why Venerable Brāhmaṇa Mahā­kapina, Venerable Maudgalyāyana, and Venerable Śāriputra established five hundred monks in arhatship, in the resultant state of non-return, and in the resultant state of stream entry.”
$92 “Not only now, monks” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, Venerable Brāhmaṇa Mahā­kapina, Venerable Maudgalyāyana, and Venerable Śāriputra, respectively, established their five hundred monks in the four meditative states and five superknowledges, in the formless realm, and in the form realm. Listen well!
$93 “Monks, in times gone by, on a certain mountain there lived two sages, each with five hundred devotees. One sage lived on one side of the mountain with his five hundred devotees, and the other lived on the other side of the mountain with his five hundred devotees. One day, one of the sages passed away. After the young brahmins made offerings to his relics, they went to see the other sage, and the other sage brought them into his retinue. Then the thought occurred to the sage, ‘After I pass away, there will be no one to look after these young men. I must see to their needs while I’m still alive.’
$94 “Now, this sage had three outstanding students, so he entrusted five hundred young brahmins to one of them and entrusted two hundred and fifty to each of the other two. Then he told them, ‘Both while I am living and after my death, you must teach these disciples and see to it that they also ponder the instructions.’ One of the three established his five hundred young brahmins in the four meditative states and five superknowledges, one established his two hundred and fifty in the formless realm, [131.b] and one established his two hundred and fifty in the form realm.
$95 “O monks, what do you think? The one who placed those young brahmins in the four meditative states and five superknowledges then is none other than Brāhmaṇa Kapina. The one who placed them in the formless realm then is none other than Maudgalyāyana. And the one who placed them in the form realm then is none other than Śāriputra.
$96 “At that time, one of them placed them in the four meditative states and five superknowledges, one of them placed them in the formless realm, and one of them placed them in the form realm, and so too now one has placed them in arhatship, one has placed them in the resultant state of non-return, and one has placed them in the resultant state of stream entry.
$97 “Furthermore, monks, Brāhmaṇa Kapina’s students have keen intelligence, Maudgalyāyana’s students are of average intelligence, and Śāriputra’s students are less intelligent. Monks, if Śāriputra’s students could not so much as generate heat when handed to Brāhmaṇa Kapina, how then could they have realizations of a higher order?”
$98 The monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “Lord, what actions did the sages Kaineya and Śaila and their devotees take that ripened such that they pleased and did not displease the Blessed One, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$99 “When did they make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, [132.a] “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there lived two householders in Vārāṇasī who were very close friends.
$100 “One day they found faith in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, gave up household affairs, and went forth. After they went forth, they studied the Tripiṭaka and became proponents of the Dharma with all the eloquence of their wisdom and freedom. They acquired provisions of clothing, food, bedding, a seat, and medicines for the sick. Each of them gathered five hundred students and became a master teacher with his own retinue.
$101 “They both practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$102 “Their students asked them, ‘What kind of prayers are you making?’ They both answered in detail, and then the devotees also prayed, ‘May we too, entrusting ourselves to the two of you, please and not displease the Blessed Buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’ [132.b]
$103 “O monks, what do you think? Those who were the master teachers of their own retinues then are none other than the sages Kaineya and Śaila. Those who were their students then are none other than these one thousand monks. At that time they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$104 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Betrothal of the Bride: Two Stories
The First “Betrothal of the Bride” Story
$105 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived two householders who were very close friends. One day, one of them said to the other, “My friend, let’s make certain that come what may, the bond between us can never be broken.”
“How could we do that?” asked the other householder.
“We have to become kin,” said the first.
$106 “Do you have a son or daughter?” wondered the other.
“No, I don’t,” said the first.
“Well, if you don’t have a son or daughter and I don’t either, how will we ever be kin?” asked the other. [133.a]
$107 “There are two ways to become related to someone,” replied the first, “through children you’ve already borne, or through children not yet born to you. Even though neither one of us has children, we could become kin through the children we’ve yet to have. Say, for instance, I have a son and you have a daughter—then we betroth your daughter to my son. Or say you have a son and I have a daughter—then we betroth my daughter to your son.” With that they became kin, despite the fact that their children had not yet been born, and they went their separate ways.
$108 Then one day the wife of the first conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan, and they raised him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids.
$109 Sometime after that, as the other and his wife enjoyed themselves and coupled, his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating her birth they named her according to their clan, and they raised her on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids. When she grew up she found faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts.
$110 One day she asked for her parents’ permission, saying, “Mother, Father, I cannot engage in sexual relations. Therefore I am asking for your kind permission to go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.”
“My child, we cannot allow that,” her parents said, “for we betrothed you to a family before you were born.”
$111 The young woman persisted in asking over and over until her parents thought, “Alas, it may be that our daughter will disobey us and go forth. [133.b] We must warn our prospective in-laws.” So they said to the boy’s parents, “Our daughter wants to go forth, and it is possible she will do so in secret. Do not delay in making her a bride and bringing her into your home.”
$112 Now no sooner had they heard this than the householders dressed up their son and sent the young man—adorned with every type of adornment, laden with riches—to the home of his in-laws, and the householders handed their daughter to him to be married, as is the custom among householders.
$113 After he had accepted her as his bride, the young woman fled. She went to the nunnery, where her preceptor led her to go forth as a novice and then conferred on her full ordination and instructed her. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, she manifested arhatship, and even began to perform miracles. She became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$114 When the young man heard that his wife had run away, he immediately set out to look for her, accompanied by many servants. Arriving at the nunnery, the young man found his wife, head shaved, garbed in the colorful religious robes, sitting cross-legged in meditation. As soon as he saw her he went to her and took her by the hand. Just then she rose up into the sky, making a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning. At the sight of this the young man and the others gathered there experienced a surge of joy, and in their joy they bowed down at her feet, and said, “O great fortunate one, please, please come down! We’re mired in misdeeds! Please reach down and lift us up!”
$115 When she descended, the young man touched his head to her feet, asked for her forgiveness, provided for all her needs, and sat before her to listen to the Dharma. She realized the thoughts, [134.a] habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature of the young man and the others gathered there, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. When they heard it, they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$116 Having seen the truths, the young man thought, “Since even a woman who has gone forth in the Blessed One’s teaching can achieve such a collection of great qualities as these, I should also give up my life at home and go forth in the Blessed One’s teaching so that I can ford the floodwaters and completely escape my fetters through diligence, practice, and effort.”
$117 With this thought he asked for his parents’ permission and went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship.
$118 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did this nun take that after she became a bride she cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship, and that this monk, entrusting himself to her completely, likewise cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of her prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$119 “Lord, where did she make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened Buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there was a certain householder’s daughter in Vārāṇasī who [134.b] had fled home life in just the same way, and whose betrothed, entrusting himself to her completely, likewise went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.
$120 “That nun practiced pure conduct all her life, and at the time of her death, she prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. After fleeing from marriage by this very same method, may I go forth in his doctrine alone, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$121 “When he saw her praying, the man to whom she had been betrothed asked, ‘Fine woman, what kind of prayers are you making?’ She explained them in detail, and after hearing her explanation, he prayed in the same way, and said, ‘Fine woman, having entrusted myself to you completely I found faith in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. When I am again to become your husband, then having entrusted myself to you completely may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$122 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that nun then is none other than this nun. At that time she practiced the holy life all her life, and at the time of her death she prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I fled from marriage, went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I once again flee from marriage, go forth in the doctrine of Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha, cast away all afflictive emotions, [135.a] and manifest arhatship.’
$123 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that by fleeing marriage and going forth she has pleased me, not displeased me, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$124 “The one who was betrothed to her then is none other than this monk. At that time he prayed, ‘When I again become your husband, entrusting myself to you completely may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$125 “So it is that he has now trusted in her completely, pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine alone, and manifested arhatship.”
The Second “Betrothal of the Bride” Story
$126 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, King Prasenajit had two chief ministers there named Mṛgāra and Dinna. The two ministers were very close friends. When the time came for them to marry each minister took a wife and enjoyed himself with her and coupled.
$127 One day when the two saw each other again, Dinna said, “My friend, we should make it so that come what may, our friendship is not severed, nor even a little strained, for as long as we live.”
“How could we do that?” asked Mṛgāra.
“We have to become kin,” replied Dinna.
$128 “Do you have a son or daughter?” wondered Mṛgāra.
“No, I don’t,” said Dinna. [135.b]
“Well, if you don’t have a son or daughter, and neither do I, how will we ever be kin?” asked Mṛgāra.
$129 “There are two ways to become related to someone,” said Dinna, “through children you’ve already borne, or through children not yet born to you. Even though neither one of us has children, we could become kin through the children we’ve yet to have. Say, for instance, I have a son and you have a daughter—then we betroth your daughter to my son. Or say you have a son and I have a daughter—then we betroth my daughter to your son.” They agreed to do just that and went their separate ways.
$130 One day, Mṛgāra’s wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child, and they named him Viśākha.
Now desires are like salt water—the more you use to slake your thirst, the more you need. Altogether Mṛgāra and his wife had seven children, and at the elaborate feasts celebrating their births they named them according to their clan, and began to rear them.
$131 Then one day Dinna’s wife also conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. But it was the child’s nature to weep constantly, and though her parents made every effort, they could not make her stop.
$132 This went on until one day Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī came to their house and taught the Dharma to the householders. When the child heard the Dharma, she quieted down. But when Mahā­prajāpatī Gautamī left, having completed her discourse on the Dharma, the child began to weep again. The householders realized that the child must have wanted to hear more Dharma. At the elaborate feast celebrating her birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named her, saying, “Since she is Dinna’s child and wishes for Dharma, her name will be Dharmadinnā.” They reared young Dharmadinnā on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, [136.a] and when she grew up she found faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One.
$133 From time to time she asked for her parents’ permission to offer food to the monks and nuns and to sit in front of them to listen to the Dharma. After hearing the Dharma, she went for refuge and took the fundamental precepts, and while still living at home she manifested the resultant state of non-return and even began to perform miracles. Having seen the truths, she asked for her parents’ permission saying, “Mother, Father, I am asking for your kind permission to go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.”
“My child, we cannot allow that,” her parents said, “for we betrothed you to a family before you were born.”
$134 Their daughter said, “If I have no interest in objects of desire, what need do I have for a spouse?”
“We cannot give you permission ourselves, but it is up to you,” replied her parents. “We will invite the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for a meal. You can ask Mṛgāra and your betrothed for permission then, and go forth.”
$135 The householder Dinna extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks. He prepared many good, wholesome foods that night, and in the morning he rose, prepared seats, filled the water pots, and set them out. Then he sent a message to the Blessed One reminding him it was time for the midday meal: “Lord, the midday meal is upon us. Know that the time has come, Blessed One, and your presence is requested.”
$136 In the morning the Blessed One donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, he set out, encircled by a group of monks and preceded by the saṅgha of the monks. He arrived at the householder Dinna’s reception room, where [136.b] he took his place on the seat prepared for him. Once the householder knew that the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks were comfortably seated, by his own hand he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. After contenting them by his own hand with many different kinds of good, wholesome food, proffering all that they wished, once he knew that the Blessed One had finished eating and his bowl had been taken away and his hands washed, he sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$137 Since he was unable himself to prevent young Dharmadinnā from fulfilling her wish go forth, he sent word to the householder Mṛgāra, asking him to please come and prevent it. As soon as he heard this, Mṛgāra came with his servants and surrounded the home of the householder Dinna. After the Blessed One had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted the householder Dinna and the people of his house with a Dharma teaching, he rose from his seat and departed. After the Buddha and the saṅgha of monks had departed, the saṅgha of the nuns also departed, and young Dharmadinnā went with them.
$138 When young Viśākha and Mṛgāra and his retinue spotted young Dharmadinnā leaving the house, they cried out, “Young Viśākha, grab the girl, Dharmadinnā!” At that moment she rose up into the sky and performed a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning. As soon as young Viśākha saw this, he thought, “How could she possibly engage in sexual relations with me now that she has attained such great virtues?” Ordinary people are quickly brought to faith through miracles, so when Mṛgāra’s retinue saw all this, they threw themselves at Dharmadinnā’s feet, saying, “O great fortunate one, please, please come down! We’re mired in misdeeds! Please reach down and lift us up!”
$139 She [137.a] descended and young Viśākha touched his head to her feet and asked her forgiveness, saying, “Of course you have my consent to go forth. I shall provide for all your needs. Whatever your needs, I shall provide for them all.” With this he sat before her to listen to the Dharma. After Dharmadinnā had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted them with a Dharma teaching, she departed.
$140 She proceeded to the nunnery, went forth, and the nuns conferred on her the precepts for female novices. Having been conferred vows for the precepts of the six factors,#96 she practiced them for two years, at which time she wished to receive full ordination. The nuns thus conferred on her the vows of the holy life and prepared to lead her to the garden of Prince Jeta for full ordination.
$141 Dharmadinnā was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with an incomparably splendid complexion and an unmatched figure—the best in the land. As soon as she was born men had started asking for her hand, but since the householder Dinna had already promised her to someone, he would not give her to anyone else.
$142 When she had gone forth, those men thought, “While she was living at home we could not have her. But now that she has left, we can do as we please. They then began to consider how they might trap her and take her by force. Someone went and alerted the nuns, and they thought, “We can no longer bring her to the garden of Prince Jeta for full ordination, nor can we keep her at the nunnery.” So they brought her back to her parents’ house, and there she stayed.
$143 After that the nuns related her story in detail to the Blessed One, and asked, “Lord, how can we complete the nun [137.b] Dharmadinnā’s ordination?”
The Blessed One responded, “In a case like this, it is permissible for the nun Dharmadinnā to be ordained by message. If one day other persons like her venture outside and similar troubles arise, they too should be ordained by message.”
$144 As soon as the nuns heard this, they conferred full ordination on Dharmadinnā by message and had her recite in exactly the way given in the scriptures. Then the nuns who had sent the message came to see the nun Dharmadinnā and informed her, “Dharmadinnā, you have received full ordination. Be conscientious and diligent.”
$145 As soon as she heard this, Dharmadinnā cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, her mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of her hands as like space itself. She became cool like wet sandalwood. Her insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. She achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. She had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. She became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$146 The monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “What action did Dharmadinnā take that ripened into her birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that she pleased and did not displease the Blessed One; that, going forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, she cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship; and that she alone was instrumental in the Blessed One permitting the full ordination of nuns by message?”
“It came about by the power of her prayers,” replied the Blessed One. [138.a]
$147 “Lord, where did she make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there lived a certain householder in Vārāṇasī. One day a child was born to him who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with an unmatched figure—the best in the land.
$148 “When she grew up she found faith in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. After she asked for her parents’ permission and went forth as a novice,#97 she ventured outside and trouble arose, so the Blessed Kāśyapa permitted her to be fully ordained by message. The nuns who had conferred on her full ordination by message came to see her and informed her, ‘So-and-so, you have received full ordination. Be conscientious and diligent.’
$149 “As soon as she heard this, she cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship, made a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning, and passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. Her preceptor performed ritual veneration of her relics, built a reliquary stūpa, and there offered flowers, sticks of incense, incense powders, and incense cones.
$150 “After practicing pure conduct all her life, at the time of her death she prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, [138.b] may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.
$151 “ ‘Just as my disciple was instrumental in the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa permitting full ordination by message, when the peerless Śākyamuni, King of the Śākyas, permits ordination by message, may I go forth in his doctrine alone, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$152 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that preceptor nun#98 then is none other than the nun Dharmadinnā. At that time she practiced pure conduct all her life, and at the time of her death, she prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone, may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Just as my pupil was instrumental in the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa permitting full ordination by message, may I likewise be instrumental in the peerless Śākyamuni, King of the Śākyas, permitting ordination by message.’
$153 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that she has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship, and that because of her I have permitted full ordination by message.”
$154 The monks then requested the Blessed Buddha, [139.a] “Lord, tell us how the nun Dharmadinnā, admired by many men, maintained her pure conduct despite great adversity.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, she was admired by many men and maintained her pure conduct despite great adversity. Listen well!
$155 “Monks, in times gone by, during King Brahmadatta’s reign in the city of Vārāṇasī, there lived a certain householder in the city of Vārāṇasī. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife. One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$156 “They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$157 “When the time came for him to marry, his parents chose a wife for him. They enjoyed themselves and coupled, and the young man became so attached to her that he never wanted to be away from her. He would drop whatever he was doing just to be around her. Finally the householder thought, ‘If he remains this attached to her, everything we have will soon be gone! I’ve got to tear him away from that carcass of hers.’
$158 “ ‘Son,’ he said, ‘what do you need that old carcass for? If you keep this up and don’t do any work, when you’re old, you’ll be penniless. Son, as long as [139.b] there’s life yet in your body, you should be making money. You can endear yourself to your wife later.’
$159 “So the householder arranged to have the young man sent to another country on business. The young man loaded up the camels, donkeys, and the rest of the animals, and ranged over vast, isolated distances through the villages, cities, and forest settlements of that enormous country. After arriving in some remote place, he sat facing the direction of his wife, like freshly cut green grass that is left to wither, and asked himself, ‘How might I visit with her quickly?’ And so he sat there, reflecting on how he might do this.
$160 “Now at that time in a mountain village there lived a certain man who was very skilled in the art of woodworking and knew how to make a garuḍa carving that could fly through the sky. When the young man heard about him, right away he thought, ‘I’ve found a way to get to her!’ He went to the artisan and said, ‘Sir, give me this garuḍa carving and I shall give you five hundred gold coins.’
$161 “ ‘I wouldn’t feel right giving it to you for good,’ said the man. ‘You can come here every day to get it. Then return and bring it back to me.’
“ ‘As you wish,’ the young man replied.
$162 “The man carved the garuḍa, taught the young man how to travel with it and how to return, and then gave it to him. The young man mounted it and traveled back to his house, where he would visit his wife, they would enjoy themselves happily, and then he would return to the mountain village.
$163 “This continued until one day his wife conceived, but after nine or ten months had passed and the time came for her to give birth, the artisan had left for another province, so the young man could not get home anymore. Moreover, the girl’s two in-laws began to accuse her of adultery,#99 saying, ‘How could you commit such a crime?’
“ ‘This was my husband’s doing,’ she replied.
$164 “ ‘It’s been many years now since our son went away,” the householder responded. “How could he have done this?’ [140.a]
“She related the story to them in detail, and they said, ‘This did not happen the way you say it did.’ Out of resentment they thought, ‘She has committed a crime,’ and kicked her out of the house.
$165 “So she left Vārāṇasī and set out for her father’s house, and in time she came to a mountain village. When she arrived she stopped there on the main road, and that evening she gave birth to the child. The birth pains were unbearable, and she lost consciousness.
$166 “A certain householder lived nearby, and in his house there was a dog named Bhūta. The dog went out onto the road and saw the baby, and while the woman was still unconscious, he took up the baby in his teeth and returned with it to the house. The householder saw that the baby was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, and immediately thought, ‘It’s okay for someone who doesn’t have children to make someone else’s child his own. Since I have neither son nor daughter, I can take this baby and raise it, and it will be as if it were my own.’
$167 “With this in mind he said to his wife, ‘Sweet one, you know it’s okay for someone who doesn’t have children to make someone else’s child his own. Since we have neither son nor daughter, we can take this baby and raise it, and it will be as if it were our own. Here, take him in your lap. I will prepare an elaborate feast to celebrate his birth.’ So the woman put the baby on her lap and there it stayed. The householder beat his drum and prepared a feast to celebrate the baby’s birth.
$168 “Earlier that morning, when her pain had subsided, the mother had woken up and thought, ‘I will pick up my baby,’ but the baby was nowhere to be found. At dawn, she began asking everyone who lived nearby, ‘Has anyone seen a baby?’ Those who had seen it said to her, ‘The householder so-and-so has a dog named Bhūta that carried your baby back to their house.’ The mother implored another woman, ‘Please! Go to that house and see if my baby is still alive!’ [140.b]
$169 “The woman went to the house to see, and returned to inform the mother of what she saw—that the householders had taken the baby as if it were their own. The mother thought, ‘It’s not right if the baby and I both suffer. It’s better for the baby to stay where it is.’ With this thought, she left.
$170 “She encountered some travelers along the way and traveled with them until bandits fell upon them. The leader of the bandits kidnapped the woman and brought her back to his dwelling to make her his mate. That night, the woman, not wanting to sleep with him, thought, ‘I have to find a way to prevent him from taking my hand, no matter what.’ She disheveled her hair, put on blue clothes, and smeared her face and teeth with red lac dye. Then she hefted a sword, entered the cave where he lived, and waited. The man entered the cave, thinking, ‘Now I’ll have a good time with that woman,’ but just then the woman charged at him, brandishing the sword, and cried out, ‘You’ll never escape from here!’
$171 “Terrified, the man threw himself at her feet. ‘Kind woman,’ he pleaded, ‘I beg you, please spare my life!’
The woman replied, ‘There is only one way to stop me from killing you. If you never act on your desire for me—not now, not ever—nor tell anyone I am here, then I will spare your life.’
“ ‘As you wish,’ said the leader of the bandits.
$172 “They swore an oath, and the woman remained there in his dwelling. Eventually the leader of the bandits began to wonder, ‘How long must I provide for her? I will find a clever way to sell her off.’ So he sold her off to a sex worker.
“The sex worker told her, ‘Sweet girl, from now on you’re staying right here and you will be a sex worker.’ [141.a]
“ ‘A sex worker!’ the woman retorted. ‘I couldn’t bear to touch any man!’
$173 “ ‘I purchased you to be a sex worker, and at a very high price,’ the sex worker said. ‘Why would I have any other need for you?’
“The woman thought, ‘I must find a way to trick her.’ So she made her herself look like a demoness, just as before, and charged at the sex worker.
$174 “ ‘The Demoness of the Dark Forest has entered your house!’ she cried. ‘How will you ever survive?’
“Terrified, the sex worker threw herself at her feet. ‘Please, spare my life!’ she pleaded.
$175 “ ‘There is only one way to stop me from killing you.’ the woman replied, ‘If, while I am here, you don’t force me to engage in such work and never tell anyone about me, then I will spare your life.’
“ ‘As you wish,’ said the sex worker.
$176 “They swore an oath, and soon enough everyone knew that there was a Demoness of the Dark Forest living at sex worker so-and-so’s house. They were all afraid of her, so no one would ever go there. The sex worker began to wonder, ‘Is there any way to get her out of my house?’
$177 “In the meantime the woman’s baby had grown, and the householders had named him Bhūta too. As he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$178 “One day, after the child’s [141.b] adoptive father died, the child thought, ‘Now that Father has died, I will take over his business.’ So he loaded up his wares and traveled abroad with some merchants until they eventually came to the place where his mother was. When they arrived in the city, they laid down their wares and set up camp not far from the sex worker’s house.
$179 “The woman asked the arriving merchants, ‘Do any of you know a merchant’s son from such-and-such a place?’
“They replied, ‘There is one merchant captain named Bhūta whose father recently passed away.’
$180 “A little later she asked his companions and they pointed him out saying, ‘That’s the one they call Bhūta.’
“ ‘Why did his father name him Bhūta?’ the woman asked.
“ ‘The householder had a dog named Bhūta who carried the child in from the road and gave it to him,’ the young men said to her. ‘That’s why his name is Bhūta too.’
$181 “Suddenly the woman thought, ‘That’s my child!’ She went to the young man, told him the whole story, and concluded, saying, ‘And that’s how it is that you’re my child, and I am your mother.’ When he heard all this the young man paid the sex worker to release his mother and brought her into his own home.
$182 “Meanwhile, the young man’s birth father had also completed his sea voyage and returned to his parents’ house. He embraced his father and mother, put his things inside, and then went to his home, where his wife was nowhere to be found. He questioned his parents. Referring to his wife, whose father’s name was Vāṣpa, he said, ‘Father and Mother, Vāṣpa’s daughter isn’t here. Where has she gone?’
“ ‘That girl had no respect for you,’ they replied. ‘She committed a crime, so we threw her out of the house and drove her away.’
$183 “The young man fumed, ‘That was my child in her womb! [142.a] You were wrong to throw her out!’ He went away in anger, demanding, ‘Where has Vāṣpa’s daughter gone?’ He called out as he went, asking everyone he saw, ‘Have you seen Vāṣpa’s daughter?’ No matter what his parents did, they could not calm him down. By the time his wife and son returned he was destitute, naked, and wandering about.
$184 “The son came to the door of his house, and seeing a man destitute and naked wandering about, said to his mother, ‘Mother, there is a madman wandering about asking, ‘Where has Vāṣpa’s daughter gone?’ When she heard this, at first she was doubtful. ‘No, it cannot be my lord,’ she said. But when she went to see for herself, she recognized him right away. She brought him into her own home and said, ‘Lord, it’s me. I am Vāṣpa’s daughter.’
$185 “When he heard her he immediately came to his senses. The woman said to him, ‘Lord, I am your wife. This is your son. Come inside—we’re home now.’ The woman bathed him, trimmed his mustache, and put clothes on him. At long last he was home.
$186 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that woman then is none other than Dharmadinnā. At that time she was admired by many men, but she maintained her celibacy despite great adversity. Now as well she is admired by many men and has maintained her celibacy despite great adversity.”
Cuts: Two Stories
The First “Cut” Story
$187 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, it was Venerable Maudgalyāyana’s custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$188 When he returned, [142.b] he would relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When he returned, he would also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Those who heard him were filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they went on to achieve great things.
$189 One day Venerable Maudgalyāyana prepared himself to wander among the animals, disappeared from Śrāvastī, and stood on the seashore.
$190 Now the great ocean has three strata. The first stratum of water is 28,000 yojanas deep, and in that stratum dwell the sea creatures known as timi, whose bodies are 700 yojanas in length. Whenever they get hungry they rise from this first stratum of water, surfacing with mouths agape. Any smaller living beings present there spill with the water into their mouths. When they have filled their stomachs, they filter the water back out through their teeth and then eat the living beings that remain in their stomachs. The second stratum of water is 25,000 yojanas deep, and in that stratum dwell the sea creatures known as timiṅgila, whose bodies are 1,400 yojanas in length. Whenever they get hungry they rise up through the first and second strata of water to feed. The third stratum of water is 25,000 yojanas deep, and in that stratum dwell the sea creatures known as timiṅgilagila. Their bodies [143.a] are enormous, measuring 2,100 yojanas. Whenever they get hungry they rise up through the first, second, and third strata of water to feed.
$191 Now at that time in the great ocean a sea creature of the kind called timiṅgila was born, and the other sea creatures, great and small, gathered around him. Again and again they cut his body into pieces—some one league long, some two leagues, some three leagues, and some up to one hundred yojanas in length—and fed on him, causing him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony.
$192 All this suffering exhausted him, so he emerged onto dry land hoping for some respite. But when he emerged onto dry land, due to his past actions, five hundred yakṣas appeared, and for five hundred days with five hundred axes they hacked off his ribs one by one. Once all his ribs had been cut away in this manner, unable to bear the pain, he let loose a great cry and rolled back into the great ocean. All of this bleeding and rolling about agitated the great ocean, roiling it up until it looked like an ocean of blood. And now that he had fallen back into it, the other creatures fed on him again. No matter whether he emerged onto dry land or stayed in the water, he suffered dreadfully.
$193 Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “What action did this being take that ripened into such suffering?” Though he went deep into equipoise and reached the far limits of concentration, he could not see an end to the lives in which this being had died from one animal rebirth and transmigrated, only to take birth as an animal again and meet with the very same suffering. He thought, “Who apart from the Blessed One could explain his deeds to me? For his [143.b] wisdom and vision are unimpeded, and his wisdom and vision are infinite.”
$194 He disappeared from the shore of the great ocean and traveled to Śrāvastī, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Then Venerable Maudgalyāyana thought, “It is time to put my question to the Blessed One, so that many might become disillusioned with saṃsāra.” He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side.
$195 Once he had taken a seat at one side, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, it is my custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$196 “When I return I relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When I return I also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Because of this, the people who hear me are filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they go on to achieve great things.
$197 “Lord, after preparing to wander among the animals, I disappeared from Śrāvastī and stood on the shore of the sea. Lord, while I was there, I saw a being whose body was 2,100 yojanas in length. What is more, [144.a] the other sea creatures, great and small, gathered around him. Again and again they cut his body into pieces—some one league long, some two leagues, some three leagues, and some up to one hundred yojanas in length—and fed on him. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony.
$198 “All this suffering exhausted him, and he emerged onto dry land hoping for some respite. But when he emerged onto dry land, due to his past actions five hundred yakṣas appeared, and for five hundred days with five hundred axes they hacked off his ribs one by one. Once all his ribs had been cut away in this manner, unable to bear the pain he let loose a great cry and rolled back into the great ocean. All of this bleeding and rolling about agitated the great ocean, roiling it up until it looked like an ocean of blood. And now that he had fallen back into it, the creatures fed on him again. No matter whether he emerged onto dry land or stayed in the water, he suffered dreadfully.
$199 “Lord, what action did this being take that ripened into his taking birth among the animals and meeting with such suffering?”
“Maudgalyāyana,” the Blessed One explained, “that being committed nonvirtuous actions over and over again. He committed many nonvirtuous actions.
$200 “Maudgalyāyana, in times past, when the totally and completely awakened Buddha Parvata, who far surpassed the listeners and the solitary buddhas, was in the world, there was a householder who found faith in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Parvata, heard the Dharma from him, and manifested the resultant state of non-return.
$201 “His wife was very well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. Her husband told her, ‘Sweet one, I [144.b] have received from the Blessed One the five precepts for practicing the holy life.#100 If you wish to remain here at home, I shall provide you with food and clothes. But if it is another man you desire, I shall relinquish you to him.’
“ ‘Lord, I need no other man,’ she said. ‘I shall love and honor only my lord.’
$202 “Many men were captivated by the woman because of her fine figure. There was a petty official living in the area who thought, ‘How could I ever get together with that woman?’ So one day, laden with gold and silver, he went to see her husband, the lay vow holder, bringing with him a host of witnesses.
$203 “ ‘Householder,” he said, “I must leave on a matter of royal concern. I cannot forward these articles there. I entrust them to you until my return.’ The householder, being an upright person, accepted all the articles in the presence of the witnesses. The petty official, putting everything in his hands, then returned to his house.
$204 “Some time later, he returned to the lay vow holder, saying, ‘Householder, give me the articles that I entrusted to you,’ and the householder returned everything to him, with no witnesses present. The man stowed the articles at his own house again and then brought all the witnesses back to see the lay vow holder and said, ‘Householder, please return to me the king’s property that I entrusted to you.’
$205 “ ‘I’ve already given it to you,’ replied the lay vow holder.
“ ‘I have received nothing from you,’ said the petty official. Turning to the witnesses, he exclaimed, ‘See how this lay vow holder acts! Would he have given all those articles back to me when we were alone, after I handed them to him with you as our witnesses?’
$206 [145.a] “After he said this, he led the man to the royal palace and had him legally convicted. Then he brought him back to his own house, where he beat him with a strip of wet leather, bound him tightly, and broke all his ribs, which was enough to cause his death.
$207 “The man’s son was not home, so the petty official commandeered not only the possessions of the house but the man’s wife as well. ‘It’s for your sake that I committed all these misdeeds, my dear,’ he told her. ‘So I am the man of the house now, and you are my wife.’
$208 “To this the lay vow holder’s wife replied, ‘How can we be together when I haven’t even performed the ritual veneration of my husband’s remains? First let me venerate his remains for a time. After that, lord, I shall do as you please.’
$209 “No sooner was this said than the petty official bore the lay vow holder’s remains to the charnel ground and incinerated them. As he sat there with his back to her, the woman leapt into the burning fire and died on the spot. At this the petty official began to brood, thinking, ‘Such wrongs I have committed, one after the other! Meeting that woman was of no benefit. Not only did I commit such senseless acts, but now she’s gone.’
$210 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that petty official then is none other than this sea creature. The act of beating the lay vow holder with a wet strip of leather and causing his death ripened such that the petty official took rebirth as a hell being, where he underwent the sufferings of the hell beings for thousands upon thousands of years. When he died, he transmigrated and took rebirth among the animals, dying from among the animals only to transmigrate and take birth among the animals again. Such are his sufferings.”
Then Venerable Maudgalyāyana inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, when will this being [145.b] be liberated from his suffering?”
$211 “Maudgalyāyana,” the Blessed One replied, “in the future a totally and completely awakened buddha named Sumati , who will far surpass the listeners and the solitary buddhas, will emerge in the world. At that distant time the actions of this being will be exhausted. After attaining a human birth, he will go forth solely in the doctrine of Sumati , cast away the afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Then his suffering will come to an end.”
$212 As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief. The Blessed One directly apprehended their grief, taught them the Dharma accordingly, and among the assembled some generated heat right where they sat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
The Second “Cut” Story
$213 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, it was Venerable Maudgalyāyana’s custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished [146.a] spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$214 When he returned, he would relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When he returned, he would also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Those who heard him were filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they went on to achieve great things.
$215 One day Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana prepared himself to wander among the anguished spirits, disappeared from Śrāvastī, and stood on the seashore, where there lay an anguished spirit with an enormous body. The lower half looked very ordinary, but from the waist up it was like two separate bodies. He was on fire, burning all over, covered in flames, and he lurched all about until, due to his past actions, lions, tigers, leopards, bears, and the like, all with fangs of iron, appeared and tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him.
$216 Humans appeared there due to his past actions as well, and they took up sharp swords and hacked at his upper body. While they hacked away at one side of his upper body, the other side would regenerate, and when they hacked away at the other side, the first side would regenerate. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, and he let loose great cries. As he tried to flee, the humans who appeared due to his past actions pursued him.
$217 Seeing all this, Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “What action [146.b] did this being take that ripened into such suffering?” When he examined that being’s past lives, he saw that after going forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, the spirit had acted as steward for the monks. But then he cut off the monks in rainy season retreat from all material support and clothing and offered it to the monks in winter retreat. Then he cut off the monks in winter retreat from all material support and clothing and offered it to the monks in rainy season retreat. Finally, he cut off both from all material support and clothing, used some of it for himself, and offered the rest to others.
$218 Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “Though indeed I can see his past actions clearly, still I shall ask the Blessed One about this so that many might become disillusioned with saṃsāra.”
$219 He disappeared from the shore of the great ocean and traveled to Śrāvastī, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Then Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, seeing that the Blessed One was teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds, thought, “Now is the time to request the Blessed One to explain about that anguished spirit.” He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side.
$220 Once he had taken a seat at one side, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, it is my custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$221 “When I return I relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When I return I also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, [147.a] being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Because of this, the people who hear me are filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they go on to achieve great things.
$222 “Lord, as I was wandering among the anguished spirits, I saw an anguished spirit with an enormous body. The lower end looked very ordinary, but from the waist up it was like two separate bodies. He was on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames, and he lurched all about until, due to his past actions, lions, tigers, leopards, bears, and the like, all with fangs of iron, appeared and tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him.
$223 “Humans appeared there due to his past actions as well, and they took up sharp swords and hacked at his upper body. While they hacked away at one side of his upper body, the other side would regenerate, and when they hacked away at the other side, the first side would regenerate. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, and he let loose a great cry. As he tried to flee, the humans who appeared due to his past actions pursued him.
$224 “Lord, what action did this anguished spirit take that ripened into his meeting with such suffering?”
“Maudgalyāyana,” the Blessed One explained, “that being committed nonvirtuous actions over and over again. He committed many nonvirtuous actions.
$225 “Maudgalyāyana, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, [147.b] the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, that being went forth in his doctrine. He acted as steward for the monks, but then he cut off the monks in rainy season retreat from all material support and clothing and offered it to the monks in winter retreat. Then he cut off the monks in winter retreat from all material support and clothing and offered it to the monks in rainy season retreat. Finally, he cut off both from all material support and clothing, used some of it for himself, and offered the rest to others.
$226 “Maudgalyāyana, what do you think? The one who provided for those monks then is none other than this anguished spirit. At that time he cut off the monks in rainy season retreat from all material support and clothing and offered it to the monks in winter retreat. Then he cut off the monks in winter retreat from all material support and clothing and offered it to the monks in rainy season retreat. Those acts ripened such that this being was like two separate bodies from the waist up, and humans appeared due to his past actions who took up sharp swords and hacked at his upper body. While they hacked away at one side of his upper body, the other side would regenerate, and when they hacked away at the other side, the first side would regenerate.
$227 “The act of finally cutting off both from all material support and clothing,#101 using some of it for himself, and offering the rest to others ripened such that there fell upon him lions, tigers, leopards, bears, and the like, all with fangs of iron, that tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him, causing him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony until he let loose a great cry, and that as he tried to flee, the humans who appeared due to his past actions pursued him.”
$228 Then Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, when will this being be released from this suffering?”
“Maudgalyāyana,” the Blessed One replied, “in the future a totally and completely awakened buddha named Aparājita, who will far surpass the listeners and the solitary buddhas, will emerge in the world. At that distant time the actions of this being [148.a] will be exhausted. After he attains a human birth, he will go forth in the doctrine of Aparājita alone, cast away the afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Then his suffering will come to an end.”
$229 As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief. The Blessed One directly apprehended their grief, taught them the Dharma accordingly, and among the assembled some generated heat right where they sat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
Being Devoured
$230 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, it was Venerable Maudgalyāyana’s custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$231 When he returned, he would relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When he returned, [148.b] he would also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Those who heard him were filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they went on to achieve great things.
$232 One day Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, prepared himself to wander among the anguished spirits, disappeared from Śrāvastī, and traveled to Vindhyācala, to a hollow in the forest where he saw an anguished spirit that was on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—he was nothing but a single, searing flame. When he fled to the plains, due to his past actions lions, tigers, leopards, bears, and the like, all with fangs of iron, appeared and tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him. This caused him extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, and he ran all about.
$233 Seeing him, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “What action did this being take that ripened into such suffering?”
When he examined that being’s past lives, he saw that after going forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, the spirit had acted as steward for the monks, but then he used the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their means of regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions to indulge himself as he pleased and to make gifts of it to others.
$234 Thereupon Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “Though indeed I can see his past actions clearly, still I shall ask the Blessed One about this, so that many might become disillusioned with saṃsāra.” He disappeared from the hollow in the forest at Vindhyācala [149.a] and traveled to Śrāvastī, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Then Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, seeing that the Blessed One was teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds, thought, “Now is the time to request the Blessed One to explain about that anguished spirit.” He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side.
$235 Once he had taken a seat at one side, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, it is my custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$236 “When I return I relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When I return I also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Because of this, the people who hear me are filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they go on to achieve great things.
$237 “Lord, as I was wandering among the anguished spirits, I disappeared from Śrāvastī, and in Vindhyācala, in a hollow in the forest, Lord, I saw an anguished spirit with an enormous body that was on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—he was nothing but a single, searing flame. When he fled to the plains, from his past actions lions, tigers, leopards, [149.b] bears, and the like, all with fangs of iron, appeared. When he submerged himself in the water, crocodiles with fangs of iron appeared. When he fled into the sky above, woodpeckers with beaks of iron appeared. All these creatures tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him. This caused him extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, and he ran all about.
$238 “Lord, what action did this being take that ripened into his meeting with such suffering?”
“Maudgalyāyana,” the Blessed One explained, “that being committed nonvirtuous actions over and over again. He committed many nonvirtuous actions.
$239 “Maudgalyāyana, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, that being went forth in his doctrine. After that, he acted as steward for the monks, calling upon many benefactors and patrons and accepting donations on behalf of the saṅgha and the stūpa. He took the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their means of regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions, and used it to indulge himself as he pleased and to make gifts of it to others. This act of cutting off the saṅgha from these donations, indulging himself as he pleased, and giving them to others ripened such that he took birth among the anguished spirits, and there was devoured by the creatures that lurk in the sky, in water, and on the plains.”
$240 As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief. The Blessed One directly apprehended their grief, [150.a] taught them the Dharma accordingly, and among the assembled some generated heat right where they sat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
The Story of Nandaka
$241 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, it was Venerable Nandaka’s custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$242 When he returned, he would relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When he returned, he would also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. [150.b] Those who heard him were filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they went on to achieve great things.
$243 One day Venerable Nandaka prepared himself to wander among the anguished spirits, disappeared from Śrāvastī, and traveled to the seashore where he saw an anguished spirit that was completely naked and covered only by the hair of her head. She was covered in flames like a burning log, and completely blind. Worms poured forth from her nose and mouth, and she reeked with a stench that could be smelled for many yojanas. She ran all about, but mottled blue dogs bit her wherever she went. This caused her dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, and she cried out loudly as she ran all about.
$244 Seeing her, Venerable Nandaka asked himself, “What action did this being take?” When he examined that being’s past lives, he saw that after going forth as a nun in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, she was hot-tempered and quarrelsome, slandered many different nuns, and created obstacles to their material well-being.
$245 Venerable Nandaka thought, “Though indeed I can see her past actions clearly, still I shall ask the Blessed One about this, so that many might become disillusioned with saṃsāra.” He disappeared from the seashore and traveled to Śrāvastī, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Then Venerable Nandaka, seeing that the Blessed One was teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds, thought, “Now is the time to ask the Blessed One to explain about that anguished spirit.” He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side.
$246 Once he had taken a seat at one side, [151.a] Venerable Nandaka inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, it has always been my custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$247 “When I return I relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When I return I also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Because of this, the people who hear me are filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they go on to achieve great things.
$248 “Lord, after preparing to wander among the anguished spirits, I disappeared from Śrāvastī and stood on the seashore. There, Lord, I saw an anguished spirit that was completely naked and covered only by the hair of her head. She was covered in flames like a burning log, and completely blind. Worms poured forth from her nose and mouth, and she reeked with a stench that could be smelled for many yojanas. She ran all about, but mottled blue dogs bit her wherever she went. This caused her dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, and she cried out loudly as she ran all about.
$249 “Lord, what action did this anguished spirit take that ripened into her meeting with such suffering?”
“Nandaka,” the Blessed One explained, “that anguished spirit committed nonvirtuous actions over and over again. [151.b] She committed many nonvirtuous actions.
$250 “Nandaka, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there lived in Vārāṇasī a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s.
$251 “When the time came for him to marry he took a wife. As they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating her birth they named her according to their clan. They reared her on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and she flourished like a lotus in a lake.
$252 “When she grew up she found faith in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, asked for her parents’ permission, and went forth. After going forth, she studied the Tripiṭaka and became a proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of her wisdom and freedom. Having acquired provisions of clothing, food, bedding, a seat, and medicines for the sick, she called upon all the benefactors and patrons to build a stūpa and a monastery associated with it that that was complete in every respect. She made offerings to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of nuns.
$253 “As she went about providing for the needs of all the nuns, she became arrogant about her well-proportioned shape, youthfulness, and high caste, and was unable to maintain her moral discipline. Then she took all the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations [152.a] for the saṅgha of the four directions, and indulged herself as she pleased. When the nuns heard of this, they banished her from the nunnery.
$254 “Consumed with fury and compelled by her anger, she assailed with harsh and hurtful language many nuns on the path of learning and the path of no more to learn. From house to house she slandered them by exclaiming, ‘These nuns violate moral discipline and are sinful!’ She thus created obstacles to their material well-being, disrespected them, and looked upon them with hate.
$255 “Nandaka, what do you think? The one who was that nun then is none other than this anguished spirit. The act of disrespecting and creating obstacles to the material well-being of those nuns on the paths of learning and no more to learn ripened into her birth as an anguished spirit. The act of assailing them with harsh and hurtful language ripened into worms pouring forth from her mouth and nose. The act of slandering them from house to house by exclaiming, ‘These nuns violate moral discipline and are sinful!’ ripened into her reeking with a stench that could be smelled for many yojanas. The act of looking upon the nuns with hate ripened into her becoming completely blind. The act of taking all the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions and indulging herself as she pleased ripened into her being snapped at by mottled blue dogs. Such were the acts she committed.”
$256 As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief. The Blessed One directly apprehended their grief, taught them the Dharma accordingly, and among the assembled some generated heat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some [152.b] manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
Chunks of Meat
$257 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, it was Venerable Maudgalyāyana’s custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$258 When he returned, he would relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When he returned, he would also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Those who heard him were filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they went on to achieve great things.
$259 One day Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana prepared himself to wander among the anguished spirits, disappeared from Śrāvastī, and traveled to the seashore. [153.a] There he saw one whose flesh was nothing but chunks of meat piled as high as a shrine hall. When he sat on the ground, needle-beaked creatures stood and jabbed him from all sides, intent on eating him, but when he rose up toward the sky, his entire body burst into flames. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony.
$260 Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “What action did this being take that ripened into such dreadful suffering?” When he examined that being’s past lives, he saw that after going forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, he had acted as steward for the monks. But then he took all the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions and used them himself, gave some to his relatives, and incinerated some out of anger. These were the actions that ripened into his meeting with such suffering.
$261 Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “Though indeed I can see his past actions clearly, still I shall ask the Blessed One about this, so that many might become disillusioned with saṃsāra.” He disappeared from the seashore and traveled to Śrāvastī, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Then Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “Now is the time to request the Blessed One to explain about that anguished spirit.” He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side.
$262 Once he had taken a seat at one side, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, it is my custom to wander from time to time [153.b] among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$263 “When I return I relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When I return I also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Because of this, the people who hear me are filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they go on to achieve great things.
$264 “Lord, after preparing to wander among the anguished spirits, I disappeared from Śrāvastī and traveled to the seashore, Lord, where I saw one whose flesh was nothing but chunks of meat piled as high as a shrine hall. When he sat on the ground, needle-beaked creatures stood and jabbed him from all sides, intent on eating him. But when he rose up toward the sky, his entire body burst into flames. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony.
$265 “Lord, what action did this anguished spirit take that ripened into his meeting with such suffering?”
“Maudgalyāyana,” the Blessed One explained, “that being committed nonvirtuous actions over and over again. He committed many nonvirtuous actions.
$266 “Maudgalyāyana, in times gone by, after going forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, [154.a] that being acted as steward for the monks. But then he took all the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions and instead enjoyed some for himself and hoarded the rest. One day, having fallen ill, he handed the riches over to his relatives. The monks saw this and put a stop to it, so he thought, ‘If they’re trying to stop me, then at the very least I shall make it so that none of us will benefit!’ Then in anger he set all the riches on fire.
$267 “After that he died from there and transmigrated, taking rebirth as an anguished spirit. Then the act of taking all the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions ripened into his flesh being nothing but chunks of meat piled as high as a shrine hall and needle-beaked creatures feeding on him. The act of burning the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions ripened such that when he rose up toward the sky, his entire body burst into flames. Such were the actions of that being that ripened into his experiences of such suffering.”
$268 As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief. The Blessed One directly apprehended their grief, taught them the Dharma accordingly, and among the assembled some generated heat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. [154.b] Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
The One Who Thought He Saw His Son
$269 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain brahmin who was aged and decrepit. He went to the garden of Prince Jeta on an errand, and he saw the Blessed One there teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Seeing him, the brahmin perceived him to be his own son and he went and put his arms around him. But when the monks saw the brahmin had put his arms around the Blessed One, they sought to hinder him.
$270 The Blessed One spoke to the monks, saying, “Monks, it is out of love for his son that he puts his arms around me. Therefore, do not hinder him. Monks, if you don’t let this brahmin put his arms around me, he will spew warm blood from his mouth and die.” So the brahmin embraced the Blessed One and then sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$271 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the brahmin [155.a] destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$272 Having seen the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and implored him, “Blessed One, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$273 The Blessed One said to him, “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life.”
As soon as the Blessed One had finished speaking there he stood, alms bowl and water pitcher in hand, with but a week’s worth of hair and beard, and with the deportment of a monk who had been ordained for one hundred years. As it is stated,
$274 Garbed in robes, with shaven heads, And senses stilled by Buddha’s will— From the very moment the One Thus Gone Spoke to them, saying, “Come, join me.”
$275 The Blessed One conferred on him instruction and, casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$276 The monks requested the Blessed Buddha, [155.b] “Lord, tell us why thousands of men have seen the Blessed One, but no one has ever said with love, ‘I have met my son!’ and then run to put his arms around the Blessed One like that.”
“For five hundred lives this brahmin was my father,” the Blessed One explained. “It is because of these habitual tendencies alone that he said with love, ‘I have met my son!’ and put his arms around me.”
$277 The monks further inquired, “Lord, if he was the Blessed One’s father for five hundred lifetimes, why is he not your father now?”
The Blessed One replied, “Because bodhisattvas want so deeply to renounce and to perform acts of charity, and in all my lives he obstructed my renunciation and charity, I prayed, ‘May he not become my father again.’ Furthermore, Śuddhodana also prayed, ‘Oh, may I become the father of the Buddha.’ ”
$278 The monks then asked him, “Lord, where did Śuddhodana make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One replied, “in times past, in the ninety-first eon, when the totally and completely awakened Buddha Vipaśyin was in the world, a certain trader offered a meal and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May my child be one as precious as this. May I please him and not displease him.’ ”
$279 The monks asked the Blessed Buddha, [156.a] “Lord, what action did this brahmin take that ripened such that he grew impoverished and old before going forth?”
“Bodhisattvas want so deeply to renounce and to perform acts of charity,” the Blessed One explained, “and he continually created obstacles to my giving and obstacles to my renunciation. This act of continually creating obstacles to my giving and obstacles to my renunciation ripened into his growing impoverished and old before going forth.”
$280 “Lord,” they asked further, “what action did this brahmin take that ripened such that he pleased the Blessed One, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
The Blessed One explained, “After going forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$281 “O monks, what do you think? The one who went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa then is none other than this brahmin. At that time, he practiced the holy life all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. [156.b] Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$282 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Farmer
$283 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain poor brahmin who made his living by farming. The brahmin, being hardworking, took up his plow early one morning and went out into the field. His wife, a brahmanī, likewise went out into the field, carrying the brahmin’s food and drink. When they had both eaten their food, the brahmanī returned home, while the brahmin stayed at work in the field.
$284 The brahmin’s field was not far from the garden of Prince Jeta, and on the way home that afternoon the brahmin and the brahmanī saw the Blessed One and his great disciples one after another emerging from Śrāvastī. They felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One and his disciples, and in their joy the two of them said to one another, “Whatever sufferings we have now are all on account of not making merit in times past. If we don’t act virtuously now either, when we die from here and transmigrate, still we will only ever be poor.”
$285 “Sweet one,” the brahmin asked, “do we have anything of great value, like the rich use to give gifts and make merit?” [157.a]
“Lord, you needn’t worry about such things,” his wife replied. “The ascetic Gautama is a field of merit for all humanity. Even doing him some small service will bring a very great result. Let us offer food to the ascetic Gautama. If we make an offering to him, our poverty will come to an end.”
$286 “As you wish,” the brahmin said. “Go and make many good, wholesome foods. Then early in the morning, when the ascetic Gautama heads for alms in Śrāvastī, we’ll go wait in the field to offer the food.”
$287 “As you wish, lord,” said the brahmanī, who returned home and prepared many good, wholesome foods. They rose early the next morning and went out into the field, where they stood facing the garden of Prince Jeta and waited for the Blessed One.
$288 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$289 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? [157.b] Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$290 “Those mired in misdeeds will be lifted up by the hand. Those lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones will command the seven jewels of the noble ones. Those who have not produced roots of virtue will produce them. In those who have already produced them, roots of virtue will ripen. The blade of wisdom will slice open the roots of virtue of those in whom they have already ripened. For them this world, adorned by the presence of a buddha, will be fruitful.”
$291 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$292 Then the Blessed One thought, “The time has come to tame both the brahmin and his wife, the brahmanī.” In the morning he donned his lower garment and holy robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, went for alms in Śrāvastī. The two brahmins saw the Blessed One from a distance. Seeing him, they approached the Blessed One, and upon their arrival touched their heads to his feet and beseeched him, “Blessed One, here, in this field, please accept this offering of food from us.” The Blessed One assented by his silence.
$293 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the brahmin then prepared a seat for him. “Please sit upon the seat that I have prepared,” he requested, and the Blessed One took his place on the seat prepared for him.
$294 Once the two brahmins [158.a] knew that the Blessed Buddha was comfortably seated, by their own hands they contented him with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that he wished. Having by their own hands contented him with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that he wished, once they knew that he had finished eating and that his bowl had been taken away and his hands washed, they sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One taught them the Dharma particularly suited to their condition and departed.
$295 As soon as the Blessed One left, the two brahmins began to pray, “By this root of virtue, may our poverty come to an end. May all the sprouts of barley growing in our field turn into sprouts of gold. May it be just so! May it not be otherwise!” No sooner had the two brahmins said these words than they saw that all the sprouts of barley growing in their field were gold.
$296 When she saw this the brahmin’s wife exclaimed, “Lord! Our prayers have been fulfilled! But we cannot make use of this gold without asking the king.”
So her husband went immediately to see King Prasenajit. Upon his arrival he addressed the king: “Deva, sprouts of gold have come up in our barley field. It would only be proper for Deva to take his share.”
$297 “Alas, has this brahmin gone mad?” thought King Prasenajit. But when he looked at him, the king saw that he had a clear mind and a peaceful demeanor. Seeing this he thought, “Might this actually be true?” and so he dispatched his royal servants to investigate. But when they arrived, they saw no golden sprouts. They returned and said to the king, [158.b] “If that brahmin hasn’t lost his mind, then where are all the sprouts of gold?”
$298 The brahmin returned and pleaded with King Prasenajit, “Deva, I am certain I see sprouts of gold, so I bid you, please take your share!”
The king thought, “Perhaps this brahmin made merit at some previous time—or perhaps he has only now sowed seeds in a good field.” So the king himself went out into the brahmin’s field, but he didn’t see sprouts of gold either. He said to the brahmin, “Brahmin, if you see gold sprouts, then whatever you’re giving away, give to me.”
$299 Right away the brahmin culled a portion from the field. “These belong to you, Deva,” he said.
No sooner did the king reply, “These are mine,” than he too saw the sprouts of gold. He was astounded to see them, and in his astonishment he asked the brahmin, “Brahmin, what did you do to achieve something so magnificent?”
“Deva, I offered food to the ascetic Gautama,” the brahmin replied.
“Brahmin, you did indeed sow seeds in a good field. Go now, don’t be shy—enjoy them without fear, and give gifts and make merit.” After saying this, the king departed.
$300 The brahmin thought, “Whatever glory I have received, I have received it by entrusting myself to the Blessed One. It is his kindness alone I must repay.” So he put the wealth of his household on extravagant display. After hosting the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for three months, providing for all their needs, [159.a] he offered the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks each a set of robes, and then sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$301 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the brahmin and the people of his house destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat. Having seen the truths, the brahmin thought, “I should give up living at home to go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, in order to ford the floodwaters and completely escape my fetters with diligence, practice, and effort.” So he gave gifts and generated merit.
$302 He went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, and, casting away all afflictive emotions with diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$303 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “what action did this brahmin take that ripened into his seeing that the sprouts of barley growing in his field were sprouts of gold, and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?” [159.b]
$304 “Monks,” the Blessed One replied, “it was partly his past actions, and it is partly his present actions as well. As for his past actions, monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, this brahmin went forth in his doctrine.
$305 “He practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. By this root of virtue, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$306 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that monk then is none other than this brahmin. At that time he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$307 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means— [160.a] that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship. These were his past actions.
$308 “As for his present actions, after offering me food, he prayed, ‘May my poverty immediately come to an end. May all my sprouts of barley turn into sprouts of gold! May it be just so! May it not be otherwise.’ These were his present actions.”
Death
$309 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, there lived in Rājagṛha a certain brahmin. When the time came for him to marry, he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$310 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences.
$311 That brahmin, having found faith in the Buddha, and in the Dharma and the Saṅgha, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts. One day he contented the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with many good, wholesome foods, and then sat before them to listen to the Dharma. [160.b] The Blessed One taught him the Dharma particularly suited to him, and departed.
$312 Then one day the brahmin fell ill. Though he was treated with medicinal roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and fruits, he could not be cured, and died. After his death, he transmigrated and took rebirth among the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. The brahmin’s son laid down his father’s remains not far from Vulture Peak Mountain, where they were cremated. In misery he remained there in the charnel ground, suffering, lamenting, and beating his chest, wailing, “My father, my only father!” and roaming all about.
$313 Now when young gods and goddesses are born they possess three different types of innate knowledge. They know (1) whence they have died and transmigrated, (2) where they have been born, and (3) why they have taken birth there.
The brahmin saw that when he died as a human being, having offered his respectful service to the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks, taken refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts, he had transmigrated and taken rebirth as a god in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
$314 The young god who formerly was the brahmin thought, “It’s been a whole day since I approached the Blessed One and offered him my respect. This isn’t proper of me. Not a day should pass without my seeing the Blessed One and offering him my respect.” So he decorated himself with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones, put on a crown decorated with various types of precious jewels, and perfumed his body with saffron, tamala, spṛka, and other herbs.
$315 That night he filled the front of his long shirt with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers. Disappearing from among the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, he approached the Blessed One, scattered the divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers over the Blessed One, touched his head to the feet of the Blessed One, [161.a] and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$316 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the young god who formerly was the brahmin destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat. Having seen the truths, he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and disappeared from the Blessed One’s presence.
$317 Just then the young god looked out and saw his son in misery there in the charnel ground, suffering, lamenting, beating his chest, wailing, “My father, my only father!” and roaming all about. Seeing him so, he went to his son and said, “My son, you needn’t mourn for me. Don’t mourn for me so.”
$318 “Who are you?” asked the son.
The young god replied, “I am your father.”
“Where did you take rebirth?” asked the son.
The young god said, “I took birth among the gods.”
$319 “What action did you take to be born there?” asked the son.
“I served the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks,” the young god replied, “and I took refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts. You needn’t mourn for me. Your concern should be for yourself. Take refuge in the Blessed One. From him all good things will come to you.”
$320 Then the young god disappeared from that place and traveled up to be among the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. The brahmin’s son not only obeyed the words of his father and gave up mourning, but in his joy toward the Blessed One he approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$321 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, [161.b] and taught him the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the brahmin’s son destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$322 Having seen the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested of the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$323 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice and conferred on him full ordination and instructed him. He cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$324 The monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why this young brahmin who lacked faith was brought by his father to perfect faith, went forth, pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, cast all away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, this young brahmin who lacked faith was brought by his father to perfect faith, went forth, and practiced pure conduct all his life. Listen well! [162.a]
$325 “Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there lived a certain brahmin in Vārāṇasī.
$326 “One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child. As he grew up, he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences.
$327 “One day his father developed a deep admiration for the Buddha, and a deep admiration for the Dharma and the Saṅgha, and he took refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts. Then one day he died, transmigrated, and took rebirth among the gods. In misery the brahmin’s son suffered, lamenting, beating his chest, wailing, ‘My father, my only father!’ and roaming all about.
“Sensing this, his father went to him and said, ‘My son, you needn’t mourn for me. Don’t mourn for me so.’
$328 “ ‘Who are you?’ asked the son.
“The young god replied, ‘I am your father.’
“ ‘Where were you reborn?’ asked the son.
“The young god said, ‘I took birth among the gods.’
$329 “ ‘What action did you take to be born there?’ asked the son.
“ ‘I served the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks,’ the young god replied, ‘and I took refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts. You needn’t mourn [162.b] for me. Your concern should be for yourself. Take refuge in the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. From him all good things will come to you.’
$330 “The young god disappeared, and the young brahmin not only obeyed the words of his father, but went forth in the doctrine of Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life, at the time of his death he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$331 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the father of that young brahmin then is none other than this brahmin. The one who was his son then is none other than this young man. At that time, he entrusted himself to his father, found faith, and practiced the holy life all his life. Now as well, he has entrusted himself to his father, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
A Story about Kokālika
$332 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, Venerable Kokālika was living in the deer park in The Terrifying Forest on Mount Sabkang. All the brahmin householders living on Mount Sabkang held him in high esteem, revered him, and honored and venerated him. Having acquired provisions of clothing, food, bedding, a seat, and medicines for the sick, he provided for all the needs of every monk who came there.
$333 At that time Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana were traveling through the region [163.a] and arrived at Mount Sabkang, where they stayed in the deer park in The Terrifying Forest. The monk Kokālika heard that Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana were traveling through the region and had arrived at Mount Sabkang, where they were staying in the deer park in The Terrifying Forest. When he heard this he went to see Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana. Upon his arrival he touched his head to Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$334 Once he had taken a seat on the side, the monk Kokālika told Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, “Lords, I shall provide for all your needs. Don’t be concerned.”
“Venerable one,” they said, “This area of Mount Sabkang is so eerie that we can’t bear to stay here. We’re going to stay at such-and-such a place, a very remote and secluded part of the mountain.”
“If you do go there,” Kokālika said, “I would still like to come and provide for all your needs. Please permit me to do so.”
$335 Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana replied, “If you don’t tell anyone that Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana are both staying on Mount Sabkang in the hermitage at such-and-such a place, then we will stay there. If you do tell anyone, then we will go elsewhere without a word to you.”
“I won’t tell anyone. Please, permit me,” Kokālika said. They assented by their silence and went to stay in the hermitage as they had agreed. As they settled in, Kokālika provided for all their needs.
$336 At that time a certain householder lived on Mount Sabkang who deeply admired the monk Kokālika and provided for all his needs. [163.b] One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. When he had grown, he entrusted himself to Venerable Kokālika, found faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One, went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts. One day he thought, “I will give up living at home to go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.”
$337 He went to see Venerable Kokālika and said to him, “Lord Kokālika, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
“Young man, have your parents consented?” asked Kokālika.
“No, they have not,” he replied.
$338 “Young man, the buddhas and their disciples neither lead novices to go forth nor confer full ordination on young persons without their parents’ permission,” the monk told him. “Go and ask your parents, then come back here. This will make things easier for you later on.”
He said, “As you wish, noble one.” Then he approached his parents and requested, “Mother, Father, I am asking for your kind permission to go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.”
$339 His parents replied, “Though death will separate us from you, for as long as we yet live we cannot permit this.”
One day, it so happened that Venerable Kokālika had to go down into the townships on an errand. He presented his students and disciples to Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, saying, “Lords, I have to travel through the townships for a little while. Lords, please confer upon these monks instruction, advice to ponder, and a topic for further inquiry.” Having thus presented the group to them, [164.a] he began to travel through the townships.
$340 When he had gone, Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana wondered, “Do these monks have some small measure of the virtues that are conducive to the four stages of penetrative insight?” They looked out and saw that they did, but that it depended solely on the two of them. So Venerable Maudgalyāyana inspired the monks with a miracle of magical abilities and Venerable Śāriputra inspired them with a miracle of admonition. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
$341 After they achieved arhatship, the householder’s son again asked for his parents’ permission, returned to the monastery, approached the monks, and asked them, “Where is Lord Kokālika?”
“What do you need him for?” they asked.
“I would like him to lead me to go forth,” said the young man.
$342 “Why do you need Kokālika?” the monks asked him. “Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana are a supreme and excellent pair. You should go forth with them.”
The young man was thrilled to hear this. He went to see Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, and upon his arrival he touched his head to their feet and sat before Venerable Śāriputra to listen to the Dharma. Venerable Śāriputra directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, the young man destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$343 Having seen the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward Venerable Śāriputra with palms pressed together, and implored Venerable Śāriputra, “Lord, [164.b] if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$344 “Young man, have your parents consented?” Śāriputra asked.
The young man replied, “Yes, Lord Śāriputra, they have.”
Thereupon Venerable Śāriputra led him to go forth as a novice and conferred on him full ordination and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. Having achieved arhatship, he established his parents in the truths, and he inspired them to give gifts and to share what they had.
$345 Then one day on Mount Sabkang the gods announced, “Pay heed! The monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana are living near your village. If you do not go see them to offer your respectful service, what can you hope for? What good will come of you?” Hearing this, many of the people living on Mount Sabkang gathered—group after group, elder after elder, one joyful group after another—and convened upon Mount Sabkang to see Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana. As they arrived they began touching their heads to their feet and offering their respect.
$346 Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana thought, “We have to put a stop to all this worldly profit and acclaim. We already made an agreement with Kokālika, saying, ‘If you don’t tell anyone that Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana are both staying in the hermitage at such-and-such a place, we will stay here in the hermitage. But if people come trying to help and offering their respect, we’ll both leave this place without a word to you.’ ” And so they departed.
$347 Kokālika’s students and disciples [165.a] said, “We will accompany our two preceptors.”
“You all must go to Rājagṛha,” Śāriputra replied. “We need to go elsewhere and act for the benefit of those to be tamed. If we all travel there together, there will not be enough food, and that would be improper.” As soon as the monks heard this, they set out for Rājagṛha via another path and settled in there, while Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana set out upon a different path, where slowly rain began to fall.
$348 At the foot of those mountains there was a mountain cave, and in that cave there was a buffalo herder woman who had recently gone there and slept with two different men. The monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana arrived after those two had left and sat down at the mouth of the cave.
The monk Kokālika returned to his monastery after those two had left, and when he arrived he found his students and disciples had all disappeared. He asked the other monks, “Where did all my students and disciples go?”
“They left with the monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana,” they replied.
$349 No sooner did the monk Kokālika hear this than he was seething with anger. “Not only did those two leave without informing me, they also took my followers with them!” he said.
While he was standing there the householder came to where he was. Kokālika asked the householder, “Householder, where did your child go?”
“He has gone forth,” the householder replied.
$350 “Who led him to go forth?”
“He went forth in the presence of Śāriputra,” the householder replied. No sooner did Kokālika hear this than he became even more furious at the two of them.
The heartbreaking admonition from the brahmins living on Mount Sabkang had likewise cut him to the quick. “Lord Kokālika,” the brahmins said, “the monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana both came here, but you didn’t inform us.”
$351 At this he became very embarrassed and thought, “Those two [165.b] may have gone and taken all my disciples, but I can’t let them get away so easily. I will go there, muster my disciples, and return.” So he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, set out on by the path that the monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana had traveled, until he eventually arrived at the mouth of that very same cave. When he saw the monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana sitting just inside the mouth of the cave, he went to them, touched his head to their feet, made pleasant conversation, and took a seat at one side. The buffalo herder woman heard their conversation, emerged from inside the cave, and departed.
$352 Now Kokālika suspected#102 there was semen on her, for those gone forth are discerning and can recognize signs. When he looked, he knew that the buffalo herder woman had slept with two men. So when he saw her, the sinful thought occurred to him, “These two revel in sin! They are sinful!” He cursed them with crude, abusive language and left for Rājagṛha. When he came to Bamboo Grove, he left behind his alms bowl and Dharma robes. Unduly belittling them to every monk he saw, he exclaimed, “Those two revel in sin! They are sinful!”
$353 When the monks heard about the situation, they informed the Blessed One, and the Blessed One warned the monk Kokālika, “Kokālika, Kokālika, may your mind be filled with joy toward these two gentle, considerate, celibate monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, or else for a long time harm will befall you, and you will not benefit, but suffer.”
“I have faith and trust in the Blessed One,” he replied, “but the monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana revel in sin. Their minds are full of sin.”
$354 The Blessed One warned the monk Kokālika a second and then a third time in the same way, saying, “Kokālika, Kokālika, may your mind be filled with joy toward these two gentle, considerate, celibate monks, Śāriputra and [166.a] Maudgalyāyana, or else for a long time harm will befall you, and you will not benefit, but suffer.”
$355 “I have faith and trust in the Blessed One,” he replied, “but the monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana revel in sin. They have fallen under the sway of sin.” The monk Kokālika paid no heed to the Blessed One’s words the second or the third time. Then he rose from his seat and departed.
$356 No sooner had the monk Kokālika departed than, first, pimples#103 the size of mustard seeds popped up all over his body. Soon after came pustules the size of beans—small beans, then large ones. After that they became even bigger—like mirabalam fruit, then like very big bilba fruit, then even the size of kapita fruit, until boils completely covered his body. Finally the monk Kokālika began to spew warm blood from his mouth and cried out, “I’m burning! I’m burning!” as pus and blood began to seep and then pour out of his body, until he died.
$357 He plummeted to the lower realms and took rebirth as a being in the Great Lotus Hell. Taking birth there, he had a body so large it extended for many yojanas. There, due to his past actions, human beings appeared and tore his tongue from his mouth. There were iron daggers on the molten iron that drenched the floor, which was on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames. These too were on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame.
$358 On his tongue drove five hundred yokes of oxen, and they too were all on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. These yokes of oxen, which arose due to his past actions, had hooves like the edge of a razor, which were also on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. They caused him infernal torment, for no matter what direction they trod, they cut and hacked at him all over.
$359 From all around there [166.b] fell upon him iron-fanged dogs, lions, tigers, leopards, bears, and hyenas, who tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him. Iron-beaked vultures, crows, and ospreys came from the sky above him and also tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, and he let loose a great cry.
$360 Now as night fell, three gods of noble complexion came to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to his feet and took seats to one side. After they had taken their seats to one side, one god informed the Blessed One, “Lord, the one who sided with Devadatta—the monk Kokālika—has passed away.” Another god added, “Lord, that monk felt such hatred toward Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana that he was born as a hell being in the Great Lotus Hell.” Then the other god said in verse,
$361 “When certain people are born, a hatchet Comes swinging from their mouths. Those who lash out with words of blame Cut only themselves down.
$362 “A torrent pouring from the mouth Carries off the joy of those Who praise the virtues of the blameful And vilify those not to blame.
$363 “A wager lost, the gamblers bicker— Fights over dice are fairly small. But the trouble brought to a mind that hates Those Gone to Bliss is enormous.
$364 “Because with evil speech and mind They cursed the Noble Ones, For 1,350,000,000 years#104 They’ll circle through the hells.”
$365 After the three gods had spoken thus, they disappeared. When night had passed, the Blessed One took his place on the seat prepared for him amid the saṅgha of monks. After taking his place, [167.a] the Blessed One said, “Monks, yesterday, as night fell, three gods of noble complexion came to see the Blessed One, and upon their arrival they touched their heads to his feet and took seats to one side. After they had taken their seats to one side, one god told the Blessed One, ‘Lord, the one who has sided with Devadatta—the monk Kokālika—has passed away.’
$366 “Another god said, ‘Lord, that monk felt such hatred toward Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana that he was born as a hell being in Great Lotus Hell.’
“Then the other god spoke in verse, and said,
$367 “ ‘When certain people are born, a hatchet Comes swinging from their mouths. Those who lash out with words of blame Cut only themselves down.
$368 “ ‘A torrent pouring from the mouth Carries off the joy of those Who praise the virtues of the blameful And vilify those not to blame.
$369 “ ‘A wager lost, the gamblers bicker— Fights over dice are fairly small. But the trouble brought to minds that hate Those Gone to Bliss is enormous.
$370 “ ‘Because with evil speech and mind They cursed the Noble Ones, For 1,350,000,000 years They’ll circle through the hells.’
$371 “Monks, do you wish to hear the lifespan of beings born as hell beings in the Blistering Hell again?”
“Blessed One,” the monks replied, “it is time for the Blessed One teach us the lifespan of beings born as hell beings in the Blistering Hell. Yes, Sugata, it is time.”
The monks listened as the Blessed One spoke, saying, “In that case, monks, listen well and bear it in mind, and I shall tell you.
$372 “As an example, monks, [167.b] if someone were to set aside one grain every ten thousand years from Kośala’s storehouse of sesame grain, which contains twenty ten-bushel vessels filled to the brim with sesame grains, one could exhaust Kośala’s twenty ten-bushel storehouse of sesame grain relatively quickly and complete the task. But I cannot say, monks, that in that time a single lifespan of a being who is born among the hell beings in the Blistering Hell would be exhausted.
$373 “Twenty lifetimes of a hell being in the Blistering Hell are equal to a single lifetime in the Bursting Blister Hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Bursting Blister Hell are equal to a single lifetime in the Chattering Teeth Hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Chattering Teeth Hell are equal to a single lifetime in the Hell of Lamentation. Twenty lifetimes in the Hell of Lamentation are equal to a single lifetime in the Cold Whimpering Hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Cold Whimpering Hell are equal to a single lifetime in the Blue Lotus Hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Blue Lotus Hell are equal to a single lifetime in the Lotus Hell. Twenty lifetimes in the Lotus Hell are equal to a single lifetime in the Great Lotus Hell. And now the one who has sided with Devadatta, the monk Kokālika, has taken rebirth there because he felt such hatred toward Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana.
$374 “That is why, monks, you should train as follows: ‘One should not feel hostile toward so much as a burnt log, let alone a conscious being.’ Furthermore, monks, one should not draw conclusions about others. Monks, those who draw conclusions about others will be lost. Monks, it is only suitable for me and those like me to draw conclusions. Instead of drawing conclusions about others, monks, one should look for the eight different causes for their behavior.#105 One should look at (1) their comportment, (2) the scope of their activities, (3) their spouses, (4) their friends, (5) their livelihood, (6) their learning, (7) what they do, and (8) what they say. Upon such analysis, all hostility will be eliminated. [168.a] Therefore, monks, you should train yourselves in this: ‘One should not feel hostile toward so much as a burnt log, let alone a conscious being.’ ”
$375 After he had said this, Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana thought, “We should check on the monk Kokālika.” They disappeared from Bamboo Grove and traveled to the Great Lotus Hell. Upon their arrival they looked around and saw there was one who looked like the monk Kokālika. After they saw him, they approached with their compassionate minds completely focused on him.
$376 Kokālika saw Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana from a distance, and when he saw them, he felt particular hostility toward them both. “Even when I am born here I am still not free of these two who revel in sin and are sinful.” No sooner did his mind begin to rage than a hundred thousand yokes of oxen appeared on his tongue. The two of them thought, “Alas, there is no curing this deluded man.” They disappeared from the Great Lotus Hell and traveled back to Bamboo Grove, and when they arrived there, in order that their fellow practitioners of the holy life might become disillusioned with saṃsāra, they explained in detail the harms he had undergone.
$377 As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief. The two of them understood the grief they felt and taught them the Dharma accordingly, and among the assembled some generated heat right where they sat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some [168.b] manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha.
$378 Then the monks then requested of the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why the monk Kokālika felt hatred toward the monks Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, and has now fallen among the hell beings.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well he intended malice toward these two and fell among the hell beings. Listen well!
$379 “Monks, in times gone by, King Mahā­sena reigned in the city of Ayodhyā. King Mahā­sena’s magistrate was a certain brahmin who was capable, clear-minded, and trustworthy, with perfect understanding of the scriptures. In every quarter he was held in high esteem, revered, honored, venerated, and admired. His profit was unrivaled, his acclaim without compare.
$380 “At that time a certain sage who had a retinue of five hundred was living in the forest. There two young brahmins who were capable, clear-minded, and trustworthy, with perfect understanding of the scriptures, took up residence.
$381 “One day the sage thought, ‘So long as I remain here in this forest devoted to austerities, I’m of help to almost no one. [169.a] I will settle near the city!’ So, he fashioned a hut of branches nearby, and there he stayed, held in high esteem, revered, honored, and venerated. Yet in time, as the sage got older, he was unable to go to the city anymore. When that time came, the two young brahmins would go there in his stead, and they were held in high esteem, revered, honored, venerated, and admired by the local royalty, the high officials, the wealthy, the householders, those in the king’s retinue, the merchants, and the sea captains.
$382 “This went on until one day Mahā­sena’s brahmin magistrate thought, ‘Before, I was held in high esteem throughout the land, revered, honored, venerated, and admired, and now all that profit and acclaim has been handed over to these two young brahmins instead. When they’re no longer here, all my profit and acclaim will be restored. I will spread malicious rumors about them both, and then, when those two suspect that they will no longer be served, they will take themselves elsewhere.’
$383 “So the magistrate spread rumors, saying, ‘Those two are indulging their desires. They’re not celibate.’ When the sage heard#106 the slanderous deprecations being made about these two, he challenged the magistrate, saying, ‘Brahmin, you should not be so hateful toward these two young brahmins, for harm will befall you for a long time, and you will not benefit, but suffer.’ Though he tried again and again, the sage could neither stop nor sway him. Hateful toward them both, he fell among the hell beings.
$384 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. [169.b] Those who were the young brahmins then are none other than these two, Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana. The one who was that magistrate then is none other than Kokālika. At that time, though I tried to stop him, he was hateful toward them both and fell among the hell beings. Now as well, though I tried to stop him, he has been hateful toward Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, and has fallen among the hell beings.”
$385 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “what action did Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana take that ripened into such untrue, malicious, worthless, spurious, unfounded, and destructive aspersions being cast on them?”
$386 “Monks,” the Blessed One replied, “the actions these two committed and accumulated did not ripen into the external element of earth. They did not ripen into the element of water, the element of fire, or the element of wind. The actions they committed and accumulated, both virtuous and nonvirtuous, ripened into nothing but their own aggregates, sense bases, and constituent elements.
$387 “When the time arrives—and even if A hundred eons pass— Fruit is born of every act That sentient beings amass.
$388 “Monks, in times past a certain two ascetics, each with a retinue of five hundred, took up residence in two different parts of the city of Pāṁśula. All the people of the city held them in high esteem, accepted them as gurus, and honored, venerated, and respected them as arhats. Their profit was unrivaled, their acclaim without compare.
$389 “At that time in a certain mountain ravine there lived a sage who was clairvoyant, a person of great miracles and great power, who also had a retinue of five hundred. He was also a great being, of a loving nature, [170.a] and compassionate. He cared deeply for beings and was committed to their welfare. He thought, ‘So long as I stay in this hermitage, I’m of no help to others, so I will gain support in the city of Pāṁśula and live there! By living there I shall certainly be able to help many.’ Having stayed in the hermitage for as long as he cared to, he set out with his retinue of five hundred. He walked to the city of Pāṁśula carrying clothes of deerskin and tree bark, a walking stick, a small water pitcher, and his ritual ladles. He fashioned a hut of branches deep in the forest, and there he stayed.
$390 “The many inhabitants of the city of Pāṁśula saw the elegance of his body, the elegance of his mind, and the elegance of those who attended him, and were filled with the greatest admiration. Due to their great admiration, they held him in high esteem, revered him, honored him, venerated him, and provided for all his needs. The sage likewise went to them from time to time to teach the Dharma, and when they heard the Dharma from him, some of them went forth in the presence of the sage and generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Some continued to live at home and perfectly adopted the path of the ten virtuous actions. The sage would come to their homes so they could be in his company and see him from time to time, so they no longer went to meet with the ascetics.
$391 “One day the ascetics thought, ‘Before, the many inhabitants of the city of Pāṁśula held us in high esteem, revered, honored, and venerated us. Our profit was unrivaled and our acclaim without compare. But since the sage’s arrival, all that profit and acclaim has been cut off. We must make it so that the sage and his retinue no longer live here. When he’s [170.b] gone, all our profit and acclaim will be restored.’
$392 “They told the sage’s young brahmins, ‘Young brahmins, you should know that since this sage has arrived, all our profit and acclaim has been cut off, so we are going to spread malicious rumors all about town saying that the sage has been indulging his desires and is no longer celibate. Think well whether you should serve and revere him. He will flee in terror of the aspersions we cast, or he will kill us. With him gone our profit and acclaim will be restored.’
$393 “The two ascetics and their retinue took their places on the avenues, in the streets, and at the crossroads and spread malicious rumors, saying, ‘The sage is an immoral lecher, a wanton wrongdoer! He indulges his desires and is no longer celibate. He is a charlatan deceiving you. You should not think to pay him homage.’
$394 “As soon as they heard this, many were unhappy with the sage, and in their unhappiness they declared, ‘This indulger of his desires is no longer celibate! Never again will we hold him in high esteem, revere him, honor him, or venerate him, nor ever go to see him!’
$395 “The sage began to wonder, ‘Why is it that before, a great crowd of people from the city of Pāṁśula held me in high esteem, revered, honored and venerated me, and now they no longer hold me in high esteem, revere, honor, and venerate me?’ He looked and saw that the two ascetics and their retinue had been spreading malicious rumors about him in the city of Pāṁśula. When he saw this he thought, ‘Whatever malicious rumors about me that have spread throughout Pāṁśula all arose [171.a] due to my profit and acclaim, so I will leave this all behind and return to my former hermitage!’ So he led the five hundred young brahmins back to their former hermitage, and there they stayed. After the sage left, the ascetics’ profit and acclaim was restored, and they were filled with glee.
$396 “O monks, what do you think? The two ascetics with their retinue then are none other than Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana. The actions of commandeering his profit and acclaim and casting aspersions on the sage ripened into their births as hell beings for hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of years. At that time, after they died and transmigrated, wherever they took rebirth, aspersions were cast on them. Now they have come to their final existence and rebirth, but until they attain arhatship, the monk Kokālika will cast untrue, malicious, worthless, spurious, and unfounded aspersions on them.”
$397 “Lord,” the monks inquired, “what action did the monk Kokālika take that ripened into his taking birth as a hell being in the Great Lotus Hell; that after he was born there, there were five hundred yokes of oxen on his tongue; that on his right and his left were iron-fanged dogs, lions, tigers, leopards, hyenas, and so on, that tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him; that from above came iron-beaked vultures, crows, and ospreys that tore into his flesh over and over again and fed on him; that from his right and his left, a forest of iron śālmali trees sprung up; and that when he couldn’t bear the heat anymore and turned the other way, from above iron daggers and great arrows and single-tipped vajras and [171.b] spears rained down?”
$398 The Blessed One replied, “It is because he was so hateful toward Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana.”
The Tired Man
$399 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, it was Venerable Maudgalyāyana’s custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$400 When he returned, he would relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, beaten, roasted, and so on. When he returned, he would also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Those who heard him were filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they went on to achieve great things.
$401 One day Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana prepared himself to wander among the hell beings, disappeared from Śrāvastī, and traveled to the Hell of Ceaseless Agony. There he saw a being with a body so large it filled many yojanas, and, due to that being’s past actions, human beings appeared and tore his tongue from his mouth. There were iron daggers on the molten iron that drenched the floor, which was on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames, and these too were on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. On his tongue drove five hundred yokes of oxen, and they too were all on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. These yokes of oxen, which also arose due to his past actions, had hooves like the edge of a razor that were on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. [172.a] They caused him infernal torment, for no matter what direction they trod, they cut and hacked at him all over. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony.
$402 Seeing this, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana thought, “What action did this being take that ripened into his meeting with such suffering?” Though he went deep into equipoise and reached the far limits of concentration, he could not see an end to this being’s suffering. All he could see was that this being had been dying from hell states, only to be reborn in the hells once again. Recognizing this, he thought, “Who apart from the Blessed One could explain his deeds to me? For his wisdom and vision are unimpeded, and his wisdom and vision are infinite.”
$403 He disappeared from the Hell of Ceaseless Agony and traveled to Śrāvastī, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana saw that the Blessed One was teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds and thought, “Now is the time to request the Blessed One to explain about that being.” He approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side.
$404 Once he had taken a seat at one side, Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, it is my custom to wander from time to time among the hell beings, to wander among the anguished spirits, to wander among the animals, to wander among the humans, and to wander among the gods.
$405 “When I return I relate to people how the hell beings suffer through being cut up, hacked apart, [172.b] beaten, roasted, and so on. When I return I also relate to people how the anguished spirits suffer through hunger, thirst, being burned, being incinerated, being cooked, and so on; how animals suffer as they eat one another; how human beings suffer through striving, anger, and exhaustion; and how the gods suffer through dying, falling, disintegrating, and decaying. Because of this, the people who hear me are filled with sorrow, and from this sorrow they go on to achieve great things.
$406 “Lord, I wanted to wander among the hell beings, so I disappeared from Śrāvastī and traveled to the Hell of Ceaseless Agony. There, Lord, I saw a being with a body so large it filled many yojanas, and due to his past actions human beings appeared and tore his tongue from his mouth. There were iron daggers on the molten iron that drenched the floor, which was on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames, and these too were on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. On his tongue drove five hundred yokes of oxen, and they too were all on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. These yokes of oxen, which also arose due to his past actions, had hooves like the edge of a razor, on fire, burning all over, and covered in flames—they were nothing but a single, searing flame. They caused him infernal torment, for no matter what direction they trod, they cut and hacked at him all over. This caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony.
$407 “Lord, what action did this anguished spirit take that ripened into his meeting with such suffering?”
“Maudgalyāyana,” the Blessed One explained, [173.a] “that being committed nonvirtuous actions over and over again.
$408 “Maudgalyāyana, in times past, when the one who transcended the levels of the listeners and solitary buddhas, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Unwavering Gait#107 was in the world, there was certain monk—a Tripiṭaka master and proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of wisdom and freedom—who was living on the patronage of a certain royal palace. There he was held in high esteem, revered, honored, and venerated. He had acquired provisions of clothing, food, bedding, a seat, and medicines for the sick.
$409 “At that time there was also a certain arhat monk who was a Tripiṭaka master and proponent of the Dharma with all the eloquence of wisdom and freedom. He was making his way through the township with a retinue of five hundred when they came to the royal palace. There many people saw the elegance of his body, the elegance of his mind, and the elegance of those who attended him. As soon as they saw him, they were filled with the greatest admiration, and he acquired provisions of clothing, food, bedding, a seat, and medicines for the sick. Those many people wished to serve and respect only him, so they no longer offered their service and respect to the former Tripiṭaka master.
$410 “The first monk thought, ‘Before that monk’s arrival, my profit was unrivaled and my acclaim without compare. But since his arrival, all that profit and acclaim has been cut off. When he’s gone, all my profit and acclaim will be restored. I will make sure that, come what may, he and his disciples will not be able to remain in this village.’
$411 “So the first Tripiṭaka master spread malicious rumors all over the city, saying, [173.b] ‘These monks are immoral! They are sinful! You should not think to pay them homage. Why should he and his immoral retinue remain here?’
$412 “As soon as they heard this, the people no longer went to see the arhat, and after that they did not think to make him offerings nor to pay him respect. The arhat began to wonder, ‘Why is it that all those people no longer come to see me?’ Then he looked and saw that the other Tripiṭaka master was spreading malicious rumors all about, and he thought, ‘It’s not right for all those people and the Tripiṭaka master to increase their demerit like this.’ So he and his retinue left the village.
$413 “The first Tripiṭaka master was delighted and thought, ‘Now all my profit and acclaim will be restored.’ Then one day he fell ill, and though he was treated with medicinal roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and fruits, he could not be cured, and died. After his death, he transmigrated and took rebirth in the Hell of Ceaseless Agony, where a thousand yokes of oxen appeared on his tongue.
$414 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that Tripiṭaka master then is none other than this being. At that time he fell under the sway of profit and acclaim, and due to his strong attachment, he cast aspersions on the arhat. Those actions ripened into his birth in the Hell of Ceaseless Agony, where a thousand yokes of oxen appeared on his tongue. Monks, from the time of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Unwavering Gait until my own, that being has died as a hell being, transmigrated, and taken rebirth as nothing but a hell being, incurring nothing but suffering such as this.”
$415 “Lord, when will this being be liberated from his suffering?” they inquired. [174.a]
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “in the future a totally and completely awakened buddha named Guru , who will far surpass the listeners and the solitary buddhas, will emerge in the world. While his teachings are still flourishing, this being will die and pass on from being a hell being, obtain a human birth, go forth in his doctrine, cast away the afflictions, and manifest arhatship. He will also be greatly criticized, and wherever he goes he will meet with much blame. After this alone fills him with deep sadness about saṃsāra, he will pass beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. Then his suffering will come to an end.”
$416 As soon as they heard this, the people gathered there welled up with grief. The Blessed One directly apprehended their grief, taught them the Dharma accordingly, and among the assembled some generated heat right where they sat. Some generated the peak, or generated the patience in accord with the truths, or generated the highest worldly dharma, or generated the attainment of seeing. Some manifested the resultant state of stream entry. Some manifested the resultant state of once-return. Some manifested the resultant state of non-return. Some went forth and manifested arhatship. Some sowed the seeds to become universal monarchs, some to become great universal monarchs, some to become Indra, some to become Brahmā, some for the enlightenment of the listeners, some for the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, and some for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. Among the assembled, most found themselves drawn to the Buddha, intent on the Dharma, and favoring the Saṅgha. [174.b]
Morsel
$417 Once, when the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, he said to the monks, “Monks, if all beings came to understand the fruits of giving and the karmic ripening of the fruits of each portion given just as I understand the fruits of giving and know the karmic ripening of the fruits of each portion given, then those who received offerings would not eat even the tiniest remnant of a single morsel unless they had given of it or portioned it out.
$418 “If beings’ minds do not change but rather remain ensnared by miserliness, they do not understand the fruits of giving or know the karmic ripening of the fruits of each portion given the way that I understand the fruits of giving and know the karmic ripening of the fruits of each portion given. That is why their minds clutch at everything, they fail to give, they eat without sharing any portion, and their minds are ensnared by miserliness.” Thus spoke the Blessed One.
After the Sugata had said such, he, our Founder, continued:
$419 “If sentient beings only knew What it is the sages teach— The ripening of each portion given And just how great it will become—
$420 “Then their minds would not be filled with greed; And not having shared, they would not eat; And the grasping that pervades their minds Would never appear again.
$421 “Unaware, the naive are veiled In darkness, and so they grasp at Everything. They never think To share, though they eat and eat. Thus their greed, born of mind, Keeps them bound.”
$422 “Lord,” the monks requested of the Blessed One, “tell us why the Blessed One has spoken in praise of giving and of the portion given.” [175.a]
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I commended giving and of the portion given. Listen well!
$423 “Monks, in times past King Candraprabha reigned in the city of Vārāṇasī. His kingdom was prosperous, flourishing, happy, and well populated. The harvest was good. Quarreling and arguments had ceased, there was no fighting or infighting, and there were no robbers, thieves, illness, or famine. Rice, sugarcane, cattle, and buffalo were plentiful. His was a reign in accord with the Dharma. He ruled the kingdom gently and mercifully, as a parent cares for a beloved only child.
$424 “This king’s nature was loving and compassionate, with a love for beings and a delight in giving. He gave gifts and made merit. To those who wished for food he gave food. To those who wished for something to drink he gave something to drink. To those who wished for clothes he gave clothes. To those who wished for incense, flower garlands, and fragrant ointments he gave incense, flower garlands, and fragrant ointments. To the sick and to the homes for the sick he provided everything that was needed. He served the lowly, the hungry, the poor, and the orphaned. He prepared a great deal of food and drink and made gifts of it to the creatures who flew through the sky, dwelt in the water, or made their homes in the fields.
$425 “One day a drought befell Kāśi. The brahmin augurs read the portents and announced that for twelve years there would be no rain. Because no rain fell, a famine broke out, and people became uncertain what to do.
“King Candraprabha made a proclamation: ‘Let those among you remain here who have food enough for twelve years. Let those who are without travel to another land, and return when harvests are good. [175.b] For to your country you may return, but to this life you cannot.’
$426 “No sooner did they hear this than some among the assembled traveled to other lands and settled there. Others, attached to their homeland, simply remained. When those of them with food had consumed it all and were sick with hunger, they approached the king and said, ‘Deva, we are famished. Please, give us something to sustain us.’
$427 “When he heard this, right away the king thought, ‘All of these people need provisioning that will last for a long time.’ With this thought, he said, ‘Wait here awhile, all of you, while I speak to the grain keepers. Then I shall take action.’
$428 “ ‘Do we have enough food for me and all those who remain in the country to last for twelve years?’ he asked.
“ ‘Deva, let us take an account of the granaries and make allocations,’ the grain keepers replied.
$429 “The grain keepers examined the granaries and made allocations, and then began to tally the people remaining in the country. Then they calculated the shares to be distributed over twelve years, reckoning that every day, each person could receive a single morsel, and the king, two.
“They said to the king, ‘Deva, for twelve years each of the country’s inhabitants can receive a single morsel per day, and your share, Deva, will be two.’
$430 “As soon as the king heard this, he announced, ‘Every day one morsel will be distributed to each person living in the country.’ All the people upheld the virtuous path, and thereafter, all who died there took birth among the gods. As they were born there, they began to fill all the gods’ residences.
$431 “Then Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, ‘There are but two reasons [176.a] that the gods’ residences fill up—the appearance of a tathāgata, or the appearance of a universal monarch. Has then a universal monarch now appeared in the world, or has a tathāgata appeared?’ But when he looked, he saw that it was not so. Again he wondered, ‘Well then, because of whom have the gods’ residences become full?’
$432 “Then he looked, realized that it was because of King Candraprabha, and thought, ‘What—is he to become like Śakra, or perhaps Brahmā?’ When he looked, he saw that King Candraprabha was practicing to attain unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. So Śakra, King of the Gods, said, ‘I will go for a time and see for myself whether he is of firm resolve. If this being’s resolve is firm, I shall worship him. If his resolve is not firm, I shall steady him.’
With this in mind, he transformed his appearance into that of a brahmin and said, ‘Deva, I am famished. Please, give me something to sustain me.’
$433 “ ‘If I cut off someone else and give to him,’ the king thought, ‘I’ll be taking one life to protect another, so I will eat just one morsel of food, and give the other to him!’ The king handed the morsel to the brahmin, but just as he thought, ‘Now I will eat the other,’ the brahmin said, ‘Deva, I can’t survive on just one morsel.’ Right away the king thought, ‘If I don’t give the second morsel to this brahmin, he will starve. He might even die. Since I am committed to the welfare of beings, I’m capable of protecting the life of another even at the cost of my own.’
$434 So he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, ‘By this root of virtue, may I become a protector for the world’s blind who are without a guide, without any guide at all, without anyone to show them the way—an arhat, [176.b] a totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods, a blessed buddha.’ Then he spoke this verse:
$435 “ ‘By this vast gift, may I become A self-arisen buddha in the triple world. And when I do, may I liberate those not freed By the mighty victors who came before me.’#108
$436 “With that, he handed the morsel to Śakra, King of the Gods, who was in the guise of a brahmin. At this Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, ‘This bodhisattva has performed a magnificent austerity.’ His brahmin guise disappeared and he assumed his natural form and asked, ‘What will you accomplish by these efforts?’
“ ‘I shall attain unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment,’ was his reply.
$437 “Śakra said, ‘With a mind and mental states like these, you are certain to fully awaken to unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment. When you do, please remember me.’ With that, Śakra, King of the Gods, let fall a mighty downpour of rain. All the grains began to sprout into a great harvest, and Kāśi was restored.
$438 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was King Candraprabha then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. At that time I also commended giving and the portion given. Why then, having manifested the fruits of giving, would the Tathāgata now not commend giving and the portion given?”
$439 This concludes Part Three of The Hundred Deeds.
$440 1. The Story of Maitrībala 2. The Dark Storm 3. Ants: Two Stories [177.a] 4. The Lay of the Land#109 5. The Story of Āraṇyaka 6. The Elephant 7. The Nāga (1) 8. The Story of Siṃha 9. The Schism in the Saṅgha 10. The Dark Forest 11. The One Who Heard
The Story of Maitrībala
$441 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, the following took place—providing a statement additional to the life story of Wealth’s Delight in explaining how the events of The Sūtra of the Setting in Motion of the Wheel of Dharma came about.#110
$442 The monks requested him, “Lord, tell us why the Blessed One sated the group of five monks with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$443 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I sated them with my own flesh and blood, and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Listen well!
$444 “Monks, in times past a king named Maitrībala reigned in the city of Vārāṇasī. During his reign, the kingdom was prosperous, flourishing, happy, and well populated. The harvest was good. Quarreling and arguments had ceased, there was no fighting or infighting, and there were no robbers, thieves, illness, or famine. Rice, sugarcane, cattle, and buffalo were plentiful. His was a reign in accord with the Dharma. He ruled the kingdom gently and mercifully, as a parent cares for a beloved only child.
$445 “This king was the epitome of love, was extremely compassionate, loved beings, and delighted in giving. He gave gifts and made merit. He provided for the ascetics, the brahmins, the indigent, the bereft, and the poor. He prepared a great deal of food and drink and made gifts of it to the creatures who flew through the sky, dwelt in the water, or made their homes in the fields. He cultivated love for the people of his country. The minds of all the people of his country [177.b] were filled with love, and due to its power no one could do them any harm.
$446 “One day, five life-draining yakṣas absconded from the prison of King Vaiśravaṇa . Draining the life out of many people, they made their way to Vārāṇasī, but as they introduced their pestilence there, they were unable to drain even the least bit of life from any being, not even the animals. They wondered, ‘Why is it that in this country we are unable to drain even the least bit of life from any being, even the animals? We should ask whose great power this is.’ They asked the shepherds and the other animal herders, ‘Why is it that we cannot harm anyone in this land in the least? Whose power is causing this?’
$447 “ ‘Our king is the epitome of love,’ they replied. ‘The minds of all the people of his country are filled with so much love that no one can do them any harm. Because of him, in this land no one can do us even the least bit of harm.’
$448 “ ‘This king is a person of merit,’ the yakṣas thought. ‘He’s well known as the epitome of love and for being quite compassionate, with a love for beings. He’ll surely be able to fill our stomachs!’ So they transformed their appearances into those of brahmins, approached King Maitrībala, and said, ‘O great compassionate one, we are famished! Please feed us.’
$449 “ ‘With what manner of food shall I feed you?’ asked the king.
“ ‘Please feed us with freshly drawn blood,’ they said.
$450 “At that the king thought, ‘Oh my! Though they dress one way, their food is another thing entirely! They’re not like human beings. But even if they’re not human, I shall do for them as I have promised. Still, I can’t harm others for the sake of feeding them, [178.a] yet without harming others I cannot get freshly drawn blood. If they can use my blood for food, then I will give them my own flesh and blood.’ So he asked the yakṣas, ‘My friends, could you perhaps use my blood for food?’
“ ‘Yes, Deva, we could!’ they replied.
$451 “When he heard this, without delay King Maitrībala arrayed the yakṣas before him and then summoned his healers and made his request, saying, ‘Find five points on my body from which to drain me, and I shall feed these beings with my blood.’
“ ‘But Deva,’ the healers pleaded, ‘we could never pierce your body with a weapon!’
$452 “ ‘They do not wish to be parted from me,’ he thought. ‘Very well, I will extract my own blood.’ Bodhisattvas have mastery of all manner of arts and professions, so he took up a mirror himself, pierced five points on his body, and offered one to each of the yakṣas, thinking, ‘I shall not stop letting my own blood until they are satisfied.’
$453 “At this Śakra, King of the Gods, thought, ‘Bodhisattvas keep their promises, and this bodhisattva has undertaken a magnificent austerity. It wouldn’t be right for the bodhisattva to suffer too much hardship.’ He decided, ‘I will fortify the life in his body!’
$454 “So Śakra, King of the Gods, fortified the bodhisattva’s body with divine life force, and even miraculously accomplished much of the bloodletting. After the bodhisattva had sated all five of the life-draining yakṣas with no difficulty at all, he prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, ‘By this root of virtue, may I become a buddha to serve as a protector for the world’s blind without a guide, [178.b] without any guide at all, without anyone to show them the way, to rescue those who have not found their way across, to deliver those who have not been delivered, to relieve the anxiety of those frozen with fear, and to place in nirvāṇa all those who have not transcended suffering.
$455 “ ‘By this great gift may I become For wandering beings a self-arisen enlightened one. May I pull from the waters of this life those who were Not freed by the mighty victors who came before me.’#111
$456 “After the yakṣas had had their fill and were sated, their senses contented, they asked the bodhisattva, ‘Great compassionate one, what do you hope to accomplish by these efforts?’
“ ‘I will attain unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment,’ the bodhisattva replied.
“ ‘If that’s so,’ they said, ‘when you awaken and manifest the unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment of a buddha, satiating living beings with nectar, then may we become your very first disciples.’
$457 “ ‘How can I make you into my very first disciples,’ the bodhisattva asked, ‘when you are cutting short others’ lives, draining others’ life force?’
“ ‘Great compassionate one, what advice can you give us?’ they asked.
“ ‘Adopt and maintain the path of the ten virtuous actions,’ said the bodhisattva.
$458 “The yakṣas heeded him, immediately adopting the path of the ten virtuous actions and praying, ‘By this root of virtue, when this one awakens into unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, may we become his very first disciples.’
$459 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was King Maitrībala then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the five yakṣas draining the life of others are none other than the group of five monks. At that time, I fed them with my own flesh and blood and set them on the path of the ten virtuous actions. Now as well I have sated them with a taste of the holy Dharma and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.” [179.a]
The Dark Storm
$460 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, five hundred merchants in Śrāvastī took up their goods and set out for another country. They traveled and traveled until eventually they came to a great, dark forest. In that forest lived a fierce, terrifying yakṣa who drained the life of others. He sent forth a great, dark storm that overtook the merchants. The merchants became desperate and had no idea what they should do. Terrified, they began making supplications to every possible deity.
$461 One of the leaders among them was a lay vow holder, and when he saw that the merchants had no idea what to do, he said, “What is the use of seeking refuge in these deities who are not a refuge? Take refuge in the Blessed One. He will protect you from suffering, despair, and misfortune.”
$462 No sooner had the merchants heard this than they took refuge in the Blessed One, saying, “We bow to the Blessed One, the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha. Lord, Blessed One, if there is nothing past, present, or future that you do not see, know, or directly perceive, then heed us now, Blessed One. Protect us from suffering, despair, and misfortune, and save our precious lives!”
$463 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, [179.b] absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$464 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$465 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$466 When the Blessed One focused his mind, he directly apprehended that the time had come to tame the five hundred merchants. He stretched out his arm like an elephant’s trunk and lifted up all five hundred merchants and their packs out of the dark forest and set them down not too far from Śrāvastī. The five hundred merchants recognized that they were near Śrāvastī and thought, “The Blessed One has rescued us!” They were elated, and because of this they thought, [180.a] “Let us give up living at home to go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, in order to ford the floodwaters and completely escape our fetters with diligence, practice, and effort.”
$467 So they went to Śrāvastī, gave up household affairs, and gave gifts and made merit. They entered the garden of Prince Jeta, where they went to see the Blessed One, touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, pressed their lips to his feet, and said to him, “Blessed One, what a difficult task you have done for us! You saved our precious lives.” Then they sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$468 The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, all five hundred merchants destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$469 Having seen the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested of the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$470 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
$471 As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, [180.b] their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$472 The monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “Lord, tell us why the Blessed One protected all five hundred merchants, rescued them from great danger, and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$473 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I rescued these five hundred merchants from great danger and placed them in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Listen well!
$474 “Monks, in times gone by, some five hundred merchants took up their goods and set out for another country. They traveled and traveled until eventually they came to a great, dark forest. In that forest lived a fierce, terrifying yakṣa who drained the life of others. He sent forth a great, dark storm that overtook the merchants. The merchants became desperate and had no idea what they should do. Terrified, they began making supplications to every possible deity.
$475 “At that time there lived a certain sage who had all the five superknowledges, a person of great miracles and great power, and he saw the suffering of the five hundred merchants. As soon as he did, he lifted all five hundred merchants and their packs up out of the dark forest and set them back down whence they came. The merchants [181.a] thought, ‘Regardless of how it happened, it is all because of this sage that we are still alive. In his presence let us give up living at home, and go forth to practice pure conduct.’ So in his presence they went forth, and all five hundred merchants generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$476 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then. Those who were the five hundred merchants then are none other than these five hundred merchants. At that time I rescued them from great danger and placed them in the four meditative states and five superknowledges, and now as well I have rescued them from great danger, and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$477 “At that time they also went forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, and after they went forth, they practiced pure conduct all their lives. At the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$478 “O monks, what do you think? The five hundred monks who went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Kāśyapa then are none other than these five hundred merchants. At that time they went forth, practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’ [181.b]
$479 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
Ants: Two Stories
The First “Ant” Story
$480 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, Venerable All-Knowing Kauṇḍinya saw the truths, and when that happened eighty thousand gods saw the truths as well. The monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why the Blessed One sated Kauṇḍinya and eighty thousand gods with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$481 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I sated Kauṇḍinya and these eighty thousand gods with my own flesh and blood and saved their precious lives. Listen well!
$482 “Monks, in times gone by, on the banks of a certain river there lived a turtle who was compassionate, had a loving nature, and loved beings. Sometimes he walked on dry land, and sometimes he swam in the water.
$483 “One day he emerged from the water onto dry land, and fell asleep there. An ant emerged from an anthill and approached the turtle. He saw the turtle asleep there on dry land, [182.a] and then returned to the nest to inform the other ants. The eighty thousand other ants in that anthill heard from the first ant that the turtle was there and came streaming out of the anthill to crawl into the turtle’s shell. As they all began to feed on him, he awoke and saw that his body was covered in ants.
$484 “Now even when bodhisattvas take a lower birth with their bodies, their minds do not descend to lower realms. So the bodhisattva thought, ‘I could go back into the water, but all these living beings’ lives would be lost. Since I strive to benefit beings, it wouldn’t be right for me to take so many lives. Better#112 to sacrifice my own instead.’ With this in mind, he took the hardship upon himself and kept silent.
$485 “As the eighty thousand ants consumed him, he prayed, ‘Oh, by this root of virtue, may I become a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha, endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha—to serve as a protector for the world’s blind without a guide, without any guide at all, without anyone to show them the way, to rescue those who have not found their way across, to deliver those who have not been delivered, to relieve the anxiety of those frozen with fear, and to place in nirvāṇa all those who have not transcended suffering.
$486 “ ‘In the same way that I have now sated them with my own flesh and blood, saving their precious lives, when I perfectly and completely awaken into unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, may I sate them with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.’
$487 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that turtle then, [182.b] and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the eighty thousand ants then are none other than these eighty thousand gods. At that time I sated them with my own flesh and blood, saving their precious lives, and now as well I have sated them with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
The Second “Ant” Story
$488 Herein is an additional episode as it appears in the life story of Wealth’s Delight.
$489 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, when Venerable All-Knowing Kauṇḍinya saw the truths, eighty thousand gods saw the truths as well. The monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why the Blessed One sated Kauṇḍinya and eighty thousand gods with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$490 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, I sated Kauṇḍinya and these eighty thousand gods with my own flesh and blood and saved their precious lives. Listen well!
$491 “Monks, in times gone by, not far from a certain mountainside was a small hole. In that hole lived a lizard who was quite compassionate, the epitome of love, and who loved beings. The iguana subsisted only on roots and fruit and did not wish any being harm.
$492 “One day, as the lizard went out looking for something to eat, a hunter spotted him and caught him alive. After he had skinned him, he let him go, picked up the skin, and continued on his way. The lizard, unable to withstand the pain, went to a riverbank and lay down in a cool place.
$493 Not so far from there [183.a] stood an anthill, and in that anthill lived eighty thousand ants. One ant emerged from the anthill and went up to the lizard to have a look. The ant, seeing that the lizard had no skin, returned to the nest to inform the others, and all eighty thousand ants came streaming out of the anthill to crawl onto the lizard’s body. As they all began to feed on the lizard he awoke and saw that his body was covered in ants.
$494 “Now even when bodhisattvas take a lower birth with their bodies, their minds do not descend to lower realms. So the bodhisattva thought, ‘I could save myself, but all these living beings’ lives would be lost. Since I strive to benefit beings, it wouldn’t be right for me to take so many lives. Better to sacrifice my own instead. While it is certain that this harm alone is enough to kill me, if I ask myself, “What is my duty?” it is my duty to give up my body for the sake of beings. I have a responsibility to them.’ With this in mind, he took the hardship upon himself and kept silent.
$495 “Then the lizard prayed for unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, saying, ‘By this root of virtue, may I become a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened Buddha, endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, a tamer of persons, a charioteer, an unsurpassed one, a teacher of humans and gods—a blessed buddha—to serve as a protector for the world’s blind without a guide, without any guide at all, without anyone to show them the way, to rescue those who have not found their way across, to deliver those who have not been delivered, to relieve the anxiety of those frozen with fear, and to place in nirvāṇa all those who have not transcended suffering.
$496 “ ‘In the same way that I have now sated them [183.b] with my own flesh and blood, saving their precious lives, when I perfectly and completely awaken into unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, may I sate them with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.’
$497 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that lizard then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the eighty thousand ants then are none other than these eighty thousand gods. At that time I sated them with my own flesh and blood, saving their precious lives, and now as well I have sated them with a taste of the holy Dharma, establishing them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
The Lay of the Land
$498 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there were two times of year when it was customary for the disciples of the Blessed Buddha to convene: in the middle of the summer months when the time came for the summer retreat, and on the full moon of the last month of autumn. When the time came in the middle of the summer months for the monks to enter retreat, they would receive special instructions to ponder, and then retreat to mountain ravines, mountain caves, reed huts, plains, charnel grounds, and forests, and settle there for the duration of the rainy season. On the full moon of the last month of autumn they would all return, give an account of all that they had realized, and put questions to their superiors regarding all that they still did not understand.
$499 There was a certain monk who, having spent that period in the countryside, made his way through the countryside, traveling and traveling until he arrived in Śrāvastī, where he put down his alms bowl and holy robes. In the morning he donned his lower garment and holy robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, went for alms in Śrāvastī. He was a newcomer, having never been there before, so he was unfamiliar with the area and had very little knowledge of the lay of the land.
$500 He had come to Śrāvastī very late, [184.a] and seeing that the other monks had already gone carrying their alms bowls filled, he thought, “I will ask where I should go to quickly get some alms.” So he went to see Upananda and asked him, “Lord Upananda, I don’t know my way around#113 Śrāvastī. Can you please show me where to go to#114 quickly get some alms?”
$501 Upananda, intending him harm, pointed at the home of a certain brahmin, a faithless man irritated by all things virtuous, auspicious, and well mannered, and said, “Go to that house there—that’s where you’ll get your alms.” With that, Upananda departed.
$502 As the monk approached the house, the brahmin, who was just heading out to another village on an errand, decided that it was a bad omen for this shaven-headed, colored-cloth-wearing man to cross his path. The brahmin grabbed hold of him, pummeled him, and stomped on him. After the brahmin let him go, the monk emerged from the house with his head gashed open, shirt and robes torn, alms bowl smashed, and walking staff in pieces, and thought, “Better to go without food.” When he came to the garden of Prince Jeta during his fast, the monks saw him and asked, “Lord, what is this? You weren’t overcome by bandits, were you?”
“No, I wasn’t overcome by bandits. Rather, Upananda thought to do me harm,” he replied.
$503 When the monks heard the story, they asked the Blessed One about it, and the Blessed One declared, “Let one monk not point another in the wrong direction.#115 And should a monk see others who don’t understand where they are headed, let him stop them. It is good to stop someone in such a way. Not to stop them will be an infraction.” [184.b]
$504 Then the monks requested the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why Upananda pointed this monk in the wrong direction and the monk went there and met with great harm.”
$505 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, Upananda pointed this monk in the wrong direction, and when he went there, he met with great harm. Listen well!
“Monks, in times gone by, there lived a turtle in a certain lotus pond. A fox that was tormented by thirst had come to that pond thinking that he would drink some water. He entered the lotus pond and saw the turtle there. He took him in his teeth and was about to eat him, but the turtle said to him, ‘Friend, please don’t kill me. I am but a morsel to you. If you release me alive, I shall lead you to a great deal of food.’
$506 “As soon as the fox heard this he let the turtle go and said, ‘Show me where I can get that food!’
“ ‘Oh friend,’ replied the turtle, ‘in such-and-such a region in a certain cave live a mother lizard and her offspring, eight of them in all. Go kill and eat them.’ In truth, there was a lioness living in that cave that had just given birth to two lion cubs. In order to protect them she would not leave the cave. But when the fox heard what the turtle had said, he hurried to an entrance at one side of the cave. Another fox saw him and said, ‘Where are you off to, friend?’
$507 “ ‘In this cave live a mother lizard and her offspring, eight of them in all. I am going to kill and eat them.’
“ ‘Look here, my friend,’ warned the other, ‘if you go in there you’ll surely meet with suffering.’
“But the first fox said to him in verse, [185.a]
$508 “ ‘I’m graced with strength and force of will. No one is my peer. This day I shall devour A lizard and her young Like a regal elephant basking in a pool.’
$509 “That fox did not heed the other’s words, and just as he was entering the cave, one lion cub caught him by the ear and the other caught him by the tail. Their mother said, ‘My sons, don’t kill that scavenger.#116 What’s the use?’
$510 “Obeying their mother’s words, the first tore off his ear, the other tore off his tail, and then they tossed him aside. The other fox saw what happened from the mouth of the cave and spoke the following verse:
$511 “ ‘ “Graced with strength and force of will?” you say, And claim none is your equal? Handsome hero, your winsome form is gone— It seems your boasting was misplaced!’
$512 “Said the first fox to the other, ‘It’s not the turtle’s fault. That I heeded and believed its words is my own fault.’ And he said in verse,
$513 “ ‘I believed the turtle when it said “There’s a lizard family in a cave.” A fool I was, with little foresight. For the failure of my ignorance, From the holy I warrant scorn.’
$514 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that turtle then is none other than Upananda. The one who was the fox then is none other than this monk. At that time the former pointed the latter in the wrong direction, and when he went there, he met with great suffering. Now as well he has pointed him in the wrong direction, and when the monk went there, he met with great suffering.”
The Story of Āraṇyaka
$515 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there lived a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. He took a wife of the same caste, and as they [185.b] enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. Now, that being was in its final existence. The spiritual friend of the house was Venerable Aniruddha, and he looked and saw that a being in its final existence had taken rebirth in their house.
$516 One day, to strengthen the parents’ resolve, Venerable Aniruddha went to their house alone, without companions or attendants. Upon seeing Venerable Aniruddha, the householder said, “Noble one, why have you come here alone, without companions or attendants?”
$517 “Where shall we find attendants,” Venerable Aniruddha replied, “if one such as yourself does not grant them to us?”
“Noble one,” the householder said, “my wife has conceived, so if we have a son, noble one, I shall offer him to you as an attendant.”
Venerable Aniruddha said, “The virtuous keep their promises.” Having spoken thus, Venerable Aniruddha departed.
$518 After the householder’s wife conceived, she went to a very isolated place and stayed there, for she was perpetually unhappy in the company of others. The householder thought, “Has my wife been possessed by some sort of spirit?” and he brought her to the soothsayers.
“No,” the soothsayers assured him, “she has not been possessed by a spirit. All this has taken place on account of the being in her womb. That being is happy to be by himself.”
$519 Then, after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with glowing, golden skin and a well-rounded head, long arms, a broad brow, and a nose fine and prominent. [186.a] At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since it was predicted before he was born that he would be happy to be by himself, his name will be Āraṇyaka.”
$520 They reared young Āraṇyaka on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and once he was able to walk, he naturally began to recall his former lives. When he looked, he saw that he had been circling in saṃsāra, where, caught up in socializing, he met with great suffering. Recognizing this, he was happy to stay by himself in isolated places and avoid such socializing distractions.
$521 One day Venerable Aniruddha knew that the time had come for the child to go forth, so he reminded the householder, “Householder, before this child was born you granted him to me as an attendant. The virtuous keep their promises, do they not? Didn’t you yourself make such a promise?”
$522 “Yes, noble one, I did make just such a promise,” the householder replied, and as he said this, he took the child by his two hands, offered him to Venerable Aniruddha, and told him, “Child, before you were born, I offered you to the noble one. Therefore go, and be an attendant of the noble one.”
“This will be of benefit to me,” the child said, and with those words he followed Venerable Aniruddha away.
$523 Venerable Aniruddha explained the Dharma to the householder and then brought the child to the monastery. There he led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship.
$524 As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. [186.b] He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
“By staying in seclusion—in hermitages, in forests, and in remote places—I shall not come into contact with anyone,” he thought.
$525 The monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “Lord, what action did Āraṇyaka take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him; and that he went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship? What fault did he recognize that even as a child he rid himself of such socializing, and was happy to be by himself?”
$526 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “he began to naturally recall his former lives and saw that he had been circling in saṃsāra, where caught up in socializing he met with great suffering. Recollecting this suffering, he was happy to be by himself.”
$527 “Lord, where did he become caught up in socializing?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, he went forth in his doctrine.
$528 “Serving as steward the monk became caught up in socializing. Because he became caught up in socializing, he [187.a] forsook his morality, and when he forsook his morality he took all the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions, and, indulging himself as he pleased, also gave them to others.
$529 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was serving as steward then is none other than this monk. At that time he went forth, but he took all the donations for the saṅgha, the donations to the stūpa, their regular support, and the donations for the saṅgha of the four directions, and, indulging himself as he pleased, also gave them to others. The act of tossing virtue aside ripened such that for five hundred lifetimes he took rebirth as an anguished spirit, and underwent great suffering.
$530 “Once he recalled his previous sufferings, he was happy to be by himself. At that time he practiced pure conduct all his life, his faculties ripened, and now he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship. What little service he did offer in accord with the Dharma ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.”
The Elephant
$531 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī he held his summer rains retreat there. After the three months of rain had passed, he prepared his Dharma robes, put them on, and, carrying his alms bowl, set out from Śrāvastī for Rājagṛha. He traveled and traveled until he eventually came to the foot of a mountain. At that time there was a certain forest elephant who was afraid of lions and had driven his herd up onto the mountain, where he looked after them. After he ascended the mountain, the elephant bull saw the Blessed One approaching in the distance.
$532 No sooner had the elephant bull seen him [187.b] than a feeling of joy toward the Blessed One surged within him and he descended the mountain. Bearing banyan branches, he went to the Blessed One, and, after bowing to the Blessed One and circumambulating him, he held the banyan branches aloft so that the bright sun would not torment his body, and followed him. He escorted him until they came to the next village, and on his way back a lion, the king of beasts, killed him. After he died he transmigrated and took rebirth among the gods.
$533 Now when young gods and goddesses are born they possess three different types of innate knowledge. They know, (1) whence they have died and transmigrated, (2) where they have been born, and (3) why they have taken birth there.
$534 The young god who formerly was the elephant saw that when he died from his life as an animal, filled with joy at the thought of the Blessed One, he transmigrated and took rebirth in a higher state as a god in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. Then he thought, “It’s been a whole day since I approached the Blessed One and offered him my respect. This isn’t proper of me. Not a day should pass without my seeing the Blessed One.”
$535 So the young god who formerly was the elephant decorated himself with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones, put on a crown decorated with various types of precious jewels, and perfumed his body with saffron, tamala, spṛka, and other herbs. That night he filled the front of his long shirt with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers. Then, appearing amid a great light in the garden of Prince Jeta, he approached the Blessed One, scattered the divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers over the Blessed One, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$536 The Blessed One directly apprehended the thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament,#117 and nature of the young god who formerly was the elephant, and taught him the Dharma in such a way that he realized the noble truths of noble beings. Hearing it, the young god who formerly was the elephant [188.a] destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry.
$537 Having seen the truths, he expressed his joy three times, saying, “Lord, Blessed One, when you dried up the ocean of my blood and tears, led me over the mountain pass of bones, slammed shut the doors to lower births, and swung wide the doors to heaven and liberation, you established me among gods and human beings, which no one has ever done for me—which neither my father and mother, nor a sovereign, nor deities, nor my relatives and all my friends, nor my ancestors before me could do, and that neither the ascetics nor the brahmins could do.”
He continued:
$538 “With force you cleaved the path I walked, Fraught with evil, leading to lower births. You unbarred the way to heavens of high merit, That I might attain the sorrowless way.
$539 “With your support, today I have gained The clearest vision, pure of faults. I shall bridge a sea of misery. I shall gain the peaceful state that so delights the noble ones.
$540 “You whom humans and gods alike revere— You’ve nary an ailment: birth, aging, or death; It is hard to behold you in even a thousand lifetimes, But today, O Sage, I see you and my life bears fruit.”
$541 Then he removed his garland, Bowed and prostrated at the Blessed One’s feet, Walked around the Victor in a gesture of respect, Turned his face to the world of gods, and flew home.#118
$542 When the young god who was formerly the elephant returned to where he belongs, the rewards of having met the Blessed One were like the profits of a merchant, the success of a farmer in the field, the victory of a national hero, and the liberation at last of the sick from any illness.
$543 At that time, the monks who were committed to earnest practice, foregoing sleep from dusk to dawn, noticed all the great rays of light spreading forth from where the Blessed One was. They were bewildered at the sight, and inquired of the Blessed Buddha, [188.b] “Lord, what was this? Last night, did Sahāṃpati Brahmā, or Śakra, King of the Gods—or perhaps the four great kings—come to offer respect to the Blessed One?”
$544 “Monks,” the Blessed One replied, “it was neither Sahāṃpati Brahmā, nor Śakra, King of the Gods, nor the four great kings who came to see me. Did you see the elephant bull who held the banyan branches as the Tathāgata was walking on the road?”
“Yes, Lord, we saw him.”
$545 “Monks, on the way back he was killed by a lion. Having felt such joy toward me, he took rebirth among the gods and came here to see me. I taught the Dharma to that young god, and, having seen the truths, he returned to where he belongs.”
$546 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “what action did he take that ripened into his birth among the gods, and that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One replied, “it was partly due to his past actions, and it is partly due to his present actions as well.
$547 “As for his past actions, monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, he went forth in his teaching.
$548 “As a monk, he had no respect for his training and became caught up in distractions. He did much that violated the fundamental precepts, both lesser and greater. Still, he maintained some of the fundamental precepts, and at the time of his death [189.a] he prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$549 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that monk then is none other than this elephant. The act of failing to maintain both the lesser and greater fundamental precepts ripened into his birth among the animals. Since he protected some of the fundamental precepts, at the time of his death he prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$550 “So it is monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me and not displeased me. These were his past actions.
“As for his present actions, the monk became an elephant who offered me his respectful service with a mind full of joy, so he took birth among the gods. These were his present actions.”
The Nāga (1)
$551 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, a nāga king called Vasu lived in the great ocean. When the time came for him to marry he took a nāga wife, and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. One day she gave birth to a child, and at the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since this is Vasu’s child, his name will be Vasubhadra.” Young Vasubhadra was reared on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he grew up, and learned to get around. [189.b]
$552 Now it is characteristic of the nāgas that three times each day and three times each night the nāga sands rain down on their bodies. This causes them to undergo dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony. Until the day the child came into his own, the nāga sands never rained down on his body. But once he had grown and come into his own, the nāga sands rained down on him too and caused him dreadful suffering and extreme, excruciating, unbearable agony, so he asked his parents, “Mother, Father, how long must I undergo such suffering?”
His parents replied, “For as long as it is destined to you, son, you will undergo these sufferings.”
$553 The young nāga looked and saw that the nāga sands didn’t rain down on the bodies of other nāgas. Seeing this he asked his parents, “Mother, Father, I think we have fallen into a lower realm. For if the nāga sands don’t rain down on those high nāgas there, why do they rain down on our bodies?”
“Those high nāgas are of great renown,” his parents replied. “It’s because of their great renown that they aren’t rained down upon.”
$554 Then he looked and saw that in the great ocean there were some nāgas who were even more wretched than they were, but nāga sand wasn’t raining down on their bodies. Seeing this, he asked his parents, “Mother, Father, are you telling me that these are all nāgas of great renown, and that because of their great renown nāga sand isn’t raining down on their bodies? For there are some here who are even more wretched than we are. Why then, if nāga sand isn’t raining down on their bodies, is it still raining down on ours?”
“Though they are more wretched than we are,” explained his parents, “nonetheless they take refuge and maintain the fundamental precepts. That’s why nāga sand doesn’t rain down on their bodies.”
$555 When he heard this, he surged with joy. “Mother, Father,” he asked, “how is that they came to take refuge and the fundamental precepts?” [190.a]
“A buddha has arisen here, in this central land,” they said. “He has let fall a rain of nectar, and so they have come to take refuge and the fundamental precepts.”
“Mother, Father,” the young nāga requested, “please, permit me to go take refuge and maintain the fundamental precepts, by whose power nāga sand will no longer rain down on my body.”
$556 “Do not take them, son,” cautioned his parents. “Though the sufferings of the sands are innate to us, they are minor. If you take refuge and the fundamental precepts but do not maintain them, it will be the basis of your taking rebirth as a hell being, an animal, or an anguished spirit, where you will undergo great suffering, compared to which your current sufferings are not even a fraction’s worth—not even a hundredth, not even a thousandth, not even a hundred thousandth.”
$557 “Mother, Father,” said the young nāga, “I shall maintain them to the best of my ability, if only to assuage the sufferings of the sands innate to us.” With those words the young nāga filled up the front of his long shirt with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers, disappeared from beneath the great ocean, and traveled to the garden of Prince Jeta, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. The young nāga saw the Blessed Buddha, resplendent and agreeable, in the distance. His senses were tamed, his heart was at peace, and his mind was tame and absolutely serene. He was graced with a supreme tranquility, shining and radiant like a golden pillar.
$558 He saw the Blessed Buddha, and the sight of him filled him with supreme joy. Full of such joy he approached the Blessed One, and when he arrived he scattered the divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, and white lotus flowers over the Blessed One. Then he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, took refuge in the Blessed One, received the fundamental precepts, [190.b] and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$559 Now that the nāga sands affected him no more, he thought, “The Blessed One has dispelled many kinds of suffering and unhappiness, and brought me many kinds of happiness and bliss. How could I repay the Blessed One? If the Blessed One will permit it, for as long as I live, I will respectfully serve the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with all their needs.”
$560 He rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and implored him, “Blessed One, for as long as I live please permit me to provide the Buddha and#119 the entire saṅgha of monks with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick. Blessed One, please permit me to do so.”
“Young man,” the Blessed One replied, “please let me go, for there are others who also need my help.”
$561 After the Blessed One remained in retreat in Śrāvastī during the rains, he instructed Venerable Ānanda, saying, “Ānanda, go and give this message to the monks: tell them that the Tathāgata will travel through the countryside to Magadha. Inform them that those who wish to travel through the countryside with the Tathāgata should prepare their robes.” Then, after staying in Śrāvastī for as long as he liked, the Blessed One traveled to Rājagṛha.
$562 The young nāga thought, “Even though the Blessed One would not permit me to respectfully serve them with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick for as long as I live, while they are on this road I can provide the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with all their needs.” He drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, [191.a] and implored the Blessed One again, “I would like to provide the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick as we travel from Śrāvastī to Rājagṛha. Blessed One, please permit me to do so.” The Blessed One assented by his silence.
$563 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, straightaway the young nāga cleared the road from Śrāvastī to Rājagṛha of stones, pebbles, and gravel, cleaned the roadside ditches, and swept away mud, filth, twigs, and dung until there was no more. Then he covered the ground with green grass and sprinkled it with fragrant water to settle the dust. All along either side he laid branches of fruits and flowers, as if it were a courtyard, and it resounded with singing parrots, peacocks, mountain birds, and cakravāka birds. He filled the ponds, pools, and reservoirs with lotus, blue lotus, white water lily, and white lotus flowers, and he magically manifested honking swans and geese and quacking ducks.
$564 He filled the length of the road with vases and lined the sides with banana trees and marvelous garlands. He set up parasols, banners, and flags, decorated them with various colored fabrics, and set out yak-tail whisks. On the right and on the left he arrayed blue, yellow, red, and white platforms, overlaid with sashed canopies, and decorated with moons, crescents, and mirrors.
$565 He decorated himself with bangles around the neck and wrists, armlets, garlands of ornaments, and strings of precious stones. He magically manifested cascading bouquets of flowers in elaborate arrangements, and he magically manifested crowds of people as well. Some held hundred-ribbed parasols over the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks. [191.b] Some held canopies aloft. Some waved fans with golden handles, others waved fans with bejeweled handles, and some scattered lotus, blue lotus, white water lily, and white lotus flowers.
$566 The young nāga followed close behind the Blessed One, worshiping him with flowers, and burning sticks of incense, incense powder, and incense cones. Whenever and wherever the Blessed One paused in repose, then and there he magically manifested a seat. He contented the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with a blend of molasses, sugarcane juice, and refined sugar. Whenever and wherever the Blessed One made camp for the night, then and there he would magically manifest a monastery that was complete in every respect. He also offered scented water for the monks to wash their feet and fragrant sesame oil to anoint them. Then the following day, once he had contented the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with many good and wholesome foods, he would again accompany the Buddha, venerating him, treating him as his guru, and offering him honor and worship.
$567 The Blessed One traveled and traveled until eventually he arrived in Rājagṛha, where he stayed in the Kalandakanivāsa, in Bamboo Grove. There the young nāga drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “I would like to provide the Blessed One and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for three months with provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick here in Bamboo Grove. Blessed One, please permit me to do so.” The Blessed One assented to the young nāga by his silence.
$568 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One [192.a] had given his assent, the young nāga then prepared everything they would need for three months there in Bamboo Grove. Once he had provided for all the needs of the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for three months, on the last day he contented them with foods of a hundred flavors and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe. To each of the other monks he also offered everything that was needed. Then he took a seat at the head of the row with thoughts of faith, and at that moment the Blessed One smiled.
Now it is the nature of the blessed buddhas’ smiles that when they smile, colorful beams of blue, yellow, red, and white light radiate from their mouths, with some traveling up and others traveling down.
$569 Those that travel down go to the beings in the Reviving Hell, the Black Thread Hell , the Crushing Hell, the Shrieking Hell, the Screaming Hell, the Hot Hell, the Hell of Extreme Heat, the Hell of Ceaseless Agony, the Blistering Hell, the Bursting Blister Hell, the Hell of Chattering Teeth, the Hell of Lamentation, the Cold Whimpering Hell, the Splitting Open Like a Blue Lotus Hell, the Splitting Open Like a Lotus Hell, and the Splitting Open Like a Great Lotus Hell, and as they descend they cool the beings in the hot hells , and warm the beings in the cold hells.
$570 In this way they soothe the particular injuries of those beings, who wonder, “Have we died and been reborn somewhere other than this place?” Then, to engender faith in them, the blessed ones radiate an emanation, and when the beings see it, they think, “Alas, it is neither that we have died and left this place, nor that we have been born elsewhere. Rather it is because of the unprecedented appearance [192.b] of this emanation that our particular injuries have been soothed.” They feel real joy toward the emanation, exhausting the deeds that brought them to experience the hells. Now, as fit vessels of the truths, they take rebirth among the gods and humans.
$571 The rays of light that travel up go to the following gods: those of the Abodes of the Four Great Kings, the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the Strifeless Heaven, Tuṣita Heaven, the Delighting in Creation Heaven, the Heaven of the Masters of Others’ Creations, and the Heaven of Brahmā’s Assembly; those of the realms called Brahmin Priests, Great Brahmā, Limited Splendor, Immeasurable Splendor, Radiant Heaven, Lesser Virtue, Immeasurable Virtue, Extensive Virtue, and the Cloudless Heaven; and those of the realms called Increasing Merit, Great Result , None Greater, Sorrowless, Sublime Vision, Great Vision, and Supreme . There they sound a cry of impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and selflessness, and they echo the following two verses:
$572 Cultivate renunciation, Practice the Buddha’s teaching— Trample the lord of death’s army Like an elephant in a house of reeds!
$573 Those who mind their way along the path Of this Dharma and Vinaya Will abandon the round of rebirth And put an end to suffering.
$574 Then the rays of light circle through the three-thousandfold universe and come back to the blessed ones. Should the blessed one wish to make a revelation about past deeds, they will disappear into the blessed one’s back. Should he wish to foretell the future, they will disappear into the chest. [193.a] Should he wish to prophesy about a hell birth, they will disappear into the soles of the feet. Should he wish to prophesy about an animal birth, they will disappear into the heels. Should he wish to prophesy about birth as an anguished spirit, they will disappear into the big toe. Should he wish to prophesy about a human birth, they will disappear into the knees.
$575 Should he wish to prophesy about someone’s becoming a great universal monarch, they will disappear into the palm of the left hand. Should he wish to prophesy about someone’s becoming a universal monarch, they will disappear into the palm of the right hand. Should he wish to prophesy about a god birth, they will disappear into the navel. Should he wish to prophesy about the enlightenment of the listeners, they will disappear into the mouth. Should he wish to prophesy about the enlightenment of the solitary buddhas, they will disappear into the hair between the eyebrows. Should he wish to prophesy about an unexcelled, total, and complete enlightenment, they will disappear into the crown of the head.
$576 After these particular rays of light had circled the Blessed One three times, they disappeared into the hair between the Blessed One’s eyebrows. Then Venerable Ānanda joined his palms in reverence and praised the Blessed One with the following verse:
$577 “From your mouth’s great gate spill forth Scores of thousand-colored spectra. Like the shining of the sun, They illumine everything.”
$578 He then supplicated him with the following verses:
“The lords of beings , the buddhas who cast off disconsolation, Are rid of savagery and pride, and are themselves the cause of all that’s good. These victors over every rival, in the absence of cause and condition Do not display their smiles, which are the color of conch and lotus root.
$579 “So if you know it’s time, for your mind never falters, Then come—ascetic, victor—quell your disciples’ hesitation. [193.b] O sage , greatest of the herd, with speech unrivaled, sure, and good, Reassure those prone to doubt.
$580 “Mountain still, and vast as oceans, Buddha, fully awakened lord, Your smile is no mundane event. Hero, make it manifest so that many might pay heed.
$581 “With speech like a clap of thunder, Graceful like a royal bull, Oh tell the fruits awaiting those, The peerless ones, who praise you!
$582 “Lord, if in the absence of the right causes and conditions the tathāgatas, the arhats, the totally and completely awakened buddhas do not smile, what are the causes and conditions that make them smile?”
$583 “Ānanda, so it is,” replied the Blessed One. “It is just as you say, Ānanda. Without the right causes and conditions the tathāgatas, the arhats, the totally and completely awakened buddhas do not smile. Ānanda, did you see the young nāga who provided for the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks, both on the road and here in Rājagṛha?”
“Yes, Lord, I saw him.”
$584 “Ānanda, by the root of virtue of this nāga’s act, he will not fall to the lower realms for one hundred eons. For one hundred eons he will take rebirth among gods and humans. After circling in saṃsāra, in his final rebirth, his final dwelling place, he will take birth as a human being. Then he will go forth and manifest the thirty-seven wings of enlightenment without a teacher or any instruction. He will manifest the enlightenment of a solitary buddha and become the solitary buddha known as Aspiration Well Sown.”
The Story of Siṃha
$585 When the Blessed One was in Vaiśālī, as a certain army chief named Siṃha and his wife enjoyed themselves and coupled, his wife conceived, and immediately her entire body began to smell of excrement. What’s more, she also had the urge to eat excrement.
$586 She explained all of this to her husband, Siṃha the army chief. “Alas!” army chief Siṃha thought, “one of those rotting spirits has assumed control of my wife,” and he brought her to the soothsayers.
$587 “No, she has not been possessed by a rotten spirit,” the soothsayers assured him. [194.a] “All this has taken place on account of the being in her womb. Once that being is born there will be no more trouble.”
$588 Then after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child that was ugly in eighteen different ways. No sooner was the child born than the house was suffused with the smell of excrement. The women laid him out on the bed and applied all different kinds of perfumes, but still could not remove the smell of filth from his body. The army chief Siṃha’s wife did not wish to show the child to him, but one of the other women informed him, “Sir, though indeed you have a son, he is ugly in eighteen different ways, the smell of excrement pervades his body, and the whole house is filling up with the smell.”
$589 The army chief Siṃha was stricken to hear this and thought, “Though a son has finally been born to me, since he’s disfigured, what use is he to me? When night falls, I’ll toss him out to the dogs.”
$590 Now in the meantime the army chief Siṃha’s spiritual advisor had met the Blessed One and seen the truths. Having seen the truths, he thought, “This being was born due to his past actions. Since he was born in a body like this due to his nonvirtuous actions, they should raise this pitiable creature. When he is grown, they should introduce him to respectful service to the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. Then at the very least he will not take birth in such a body in his next life.”
$591 So they reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and when he had grown, his father said to him, “Son, you have a body like this on account of your nonvirtuous past actions. [194.b] Right now the Blessed One is a rich field of merit for all humanity.#120 Even doing him some small service will bring a great result and benefit you greatly. Offer him your service, make good prayers, and perhaps the burden of your past deeds#121 will be lighter.”
$592 Heeding his father’s words, he began to respectfully serve the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. One day, at the young man’s behest, his parents extended an invitation to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks, and he contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. Once he knew that their bowls had been taken away and their hands washed, he brought in a very low seat and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$593 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the young man destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$594 Having seen the truths, he thought, “If my body weren’t like this, I too would go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, in order to ford the floodwaters and completely escape my fetters with diligence, practice, and effort.” No sooner had he thought this than his ugly features and the unpleasant smell disappeared, and he was filled with exceptional joy toward the Blessed One.
$595 Full of such joy, he pressed his palms together, bowed toward the Blessed One, and requested, [195.a] “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$596 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$597 The monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, what action did this monk take that ripened into his being ugly in eighteen different ways, and that the smell of excrement arose from all over his body? What action did he take that, as soon as he felt a sense of renunciation, his ugliness disappeared and he became good looking; that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him; and that he went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$598 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that he committed and accumulated:
“Monks, in times gone by, in a mountain village there lived a brahmin who was well proportioned, [195.b] pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. Arrogant about his good looks and youthfulness, he was contemptuous toward many ascetics and brahmins. One day he went to the roof of his house and sat there surrounded by young brahmins.
$599 “In times when a blessed one has not arisen in the world, out of compassion for the destitute and suffering the solitary buddhas appear, taking up residence in remote places. Solitary as the rhinoceros, in all the world they alone are worthy of offerings.
$600 “So it was that a solitary buddha was going for alms in that mountain town, where he received very good food and drink. He was carrying it when the brahmin spotted him striding away from the front door of the brahmin’s house and proceeding to the main road. There was a pot full of excrement on the rooftop in front of the brahmin. Intending the solitary buddha harm, he kicked the pot down on top of him and it soiled the sage’s clothes, body, and alms bowl. The solitary buddha looked up as the brahmin’s face turned from gleeful to hideous, degraded by the actions of his own body.
$601 “Then the solitary buddha thought, ‘This emotionally afflicted person has become so abased! I have to help him.’ With this thought he rose up into the sky, making a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning.
“Ordinary people are quickly brought to faith through miracles, so when the brahmin saw all this, he bowed down at the sage’s feet like a tree felled by a saw, saying, ‘O great fortunate one, please, please come down! I’m mired in misdeeds! Please reach down and lift me up!’ Out of compassion for him, the solitary buddha descended. The brahmin invited him inside, carried away his garments, anointed his body with fragrance, bathed him in scented water, [196.a] and offered him a new Dharma robe.
$602 “Then, after he had contented him with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that he wished, he touched his head to his feet, asked his forgiveness, and prayed, ‘May no portion of the act of having done harm to this supreme object of worship ripen unto me. By the root of virtue of having paid homage to him, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I be well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. May I achieve such great virtues. Should it be the case that this nonvirtue must certainly bear fruit, then as soon as I feel a sense of renunciation, may my ugliness disappear, and may I become good looking.’
$603 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that brahmin then is now Siṃha’s very own son. At that time, the act of doing harm to that solitary buddha ripened such that wherever he was born, he was ugly in eighteen different ways, and his entire body emitted a smell of excrement. Later, he paid homage to him and prayed, ‘By this root of the virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I be well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. May I achieve such great virtues. Should it be the case that this nonvirtue must certainly bear fruit, then as soon as I feel a sense of renunciation, may my ugliness disappear and may I become good looking.’
$604 “Monks, I am more exalted [196.b] than even a hundred thousand solitary buddhas, and he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, manifested arhatship, and as soon as he felt a sense of renunciation, his ugliness disappeared and he became good looking.”
“Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did the army chief take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
$605 The Blessed One replied, “He became a lay vow holder in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Then, he gave gifts and made merit, took refuge, and maintained the fundamental precepts all his life. At the time of his death he prayed, ‘Oh, by this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’
$606 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was a lay vow holder in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa then is none other than the army chief Siṃha. There he gave gifts and made merit, took refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts, and prayed at the time of his death. Those acts ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$607 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that [197.a] he has pleased me, and not displeased me.”
The Schism in the Saṅgha
$608 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, there was a famine of such severity and duration that beggars did not receive any food. After all, if parents could not hope to provide even their own children with food, what need is there to speak of beggars.
$609 The Blessed One addressed the monks, saying, “Monks, I would very much like to spend three months in meditative seclusion. During that period let no monk approach the Blessed One except on the fifteenth day for the poṣadha purification ceremony or to bring food.” Having spoken thus, the Blessed One spent three months in secluded meditation, and the monks agreed among themselves that none of them would go to see the Blessed One except on the fifteenth day for the poṣadha purification ceremony or to bring food.
$610 At this Devadatta#122 thought, “The time has come for me to cause a schism in the saṅgha of the ascetic Gautama’s disciples—to cause a schism in his circle.” So he said to the monks, “Lords, behold how the ascetic Gautama treats his disciples! Just when he ought to provide for all the monks’ needs, he remains in secluded meditation. Come, monks! Stay with me and I shall provide for all your needs.”
$611 Some five hundred monks heeded his words and decided to disregard the Blessed One. They went to meet with Devadatta, who gathered those monks around him and declared the following:
“Since the ascetic Gautama stays in a remote hermitage, we will stay in the village. Why? Because, monks, there are many disadvantages to staying in a remote hermitage. [197.b]
$612 “Since the ascetic Gautama permits the eating of meat, we will not eat it. Why? On the grounds that beings will be killed.
“Since the ascetic Gautama eats salt, we will not eat it. Why? Because it comes from salt water.
$613 “Since the ascetic Gautama drinks milk, we will not drink it. Why? On the grounds that it causes the calves distress.
“Since the ascetic Gautama dons fringed robes, we will not wear them. Why? Because they are a waste of people’s earnings.
$614 “Whoever wishes to take these five vows as the basis of his conduct and to accept and receive them, and wishes to part now from the ascetic Gautama, to follow another, and to sever himself from the ascetic Gautama, let him take a tally stick.” He distributed the tally sticks among the saṅgha, and five hundred monks took them. After the sticks had been handed out, Devadatta led the monks make the following supplication:
$615 ‘Lord, please heed this saṅgha:
‘Since the ascetic Gautama stays in a remote hermitage, we will stay in the village. Why? Because, monks, there are many disadvantages to remaining in the monastery.
“If the ascetic Gautama permits the eating of meat, we will not eat it. Why? On the grounds that beings will be killed.
“If the ascetic Gautama eats salt, we will not eat it. Why? Because it comes from salt water.
$616 “If the ascetic Gautama drinks milk, we will not drink it. Why? On the grounds that it causes the calves distress.
“If the ascetic Gautama dons fringed robes, we will not wear them. Why? Because they are a waste of people’s earnings.
“With your consent, if the time is right, we, your saṅgha, request to take these five vows as [198.a] the foundation of our conduct.”
$617 Led by Devadatta, the five hundred monks strode into Kurkuṭārāma Gardens. The foremost of his monks—Kokālika, Khaṇḍadravya, Kaṭamorakatiṣya, and Samudradatta—organized them into seated rows on the right and on the left. Devadatta took a seat in the middle of the group, and felt like a masterful Dharma teacher. The idea had come to him, “Now I have finished creating a schism in the ascetic Gautama’s saṅgha of monks. I have finished creating a schism in his retinue,” and, sitting in the middle of the group, he felt like a masterful Dharma teacher.
$618 Because of the schism in the saṅgha, the monks did not practice, contemplate, give any precepts or instruction, or recite. They did not recollect the sūtras, nor did they recollect the vinaya, nor did they recollect the abhidharma. There were obstacles to every virtuous endeavor.
$619 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what activities did the Blessed One undertake that ripened into a division of the saṅgha?”
“It was I myself,” the Blessed One replied, “who, in previous lifetimes, put the conditions in place and accumulated the causes for this. It was as inevitable as the tides. If I alone committed and accumulated these actions, which are certain to return, who else could come to experience them?
$620 “Monks, the actions that I committed and accumulated did not ripen into the external element of earth. They did not ripen into the element of water, nor the element of fire, nor the element of wind. The actions I committed and accumulated, both virtuous and nonvirtuous, ripened into nothing but my own aggregates, sense bases, and constituent elements.
$621 “When the time arrives—and even if A hundred eons pass— Fruit is born of every act That sentient beings amass.
$622 “Monks, it took place in times gone by, during King Brahmadatta’s reign in the city of Vārāṇasī. At that time in Vārāṇasī, in one of the sages’ dwellings there lived a certain sage who was clairvoyant [198.b] and supported by five hundred of his disciples.
$623 “One day a brahmin came from the south with five hundred disciples and established himself near the sage’s dwelling. There he began to teach his five hundred young brahmins the secret mantras of the brahmins. That brahmin was also a master of the eighteen sciences. When some disciples of the first brahmin sage who had already been living there heard about the brahmin, they went to see him, saying, ‘Teacher, work your benefit upon us as well!’
$624 “ ‘How, then, am I to benefit you?’ the brahmin asked.
“The young brahmins said, ‘We request that you benefit us by teaching recitation.’
“ ‘I don’t teach the disciples of others,’ the brahmin said.
$625 “The disciples of the first brahmin thought, ‘Our preceptor may have attracted us with food and clothes, but he is not capable of instructing us in recitation. Let us abandon that one and entrust ourselves to this brahmin instead. Let’s get together and learn recitation.’ So they said to the second brahmin, ‘We are abandoning our teacher. We shall entrust ourselves to you alone.’
$626 “ ‘If that’s the case,’ the brahmin said, ‘let me help you by providing you with food and clothes, and by teaching you recitation.’
“No sooner had they heard this than the young brahmins left the sage friendless and all alone and entrusted themselves to the brahmin, who gathered them around him by providing them with food and clothes and by teaching them recitation.
$627 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that brahmin then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The action of causing a schism in that sage’s retinue ripened such that for hundreds upon hundreds and thousands upon thousands of years I took rebirth as a hell being and was cooked. Then when I died from there and transmigrated, wherever I was born I underwent separation from my disciples up until this very day, when, due to the ripening of that action, Devadatta has divided my circle.” [199.a]
The Dark Forest
$628 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there was a certain very dark forest, and in that forest was a certain place where spring water pooled. Some five hundred sages lived at the spring and practiced austerities. All of them were in their final existence, like ripe fruit ready to burst at the touch of a blade.
$629 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$630 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$631 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame [199.b] Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$632 The Blessed One thought, “The time has come to tame those five hundred sages.” He disappeared from Śrāvastī and traveled to the dark forest. The five hundred sages saw the Blessed One from a distance, and when they saw him they said to one another, “Oh no! Here comes the ascetic Gautama, who has taken on many distractions and given up begging for his livelihood. When he gets here, let us not speak to him at all but only indicate the huts with a hand gesture.”
$633 So all five hundred sages hunkered down and said nothing at all. As the Blessed One, lord of taming actions, stepped before them and addressed them, they did not answer the Blessed One at all, but only indicated the huts with a hand gesture. The Blessed One entered a hut and took his place on a grass seat. Then, in order to set right the five hundred sages, the Blessed One performed a miracle that dried up the pool of spring water. When the five hundred sages saw that there was no more water in the pool, they suffered greatly and began making supplications to their deity, but still no water came from the spring.
$634 Then, in order to engender faith in them, the deity revealed his bodily form to the five hundred sages and said, “What is the use of fasting and going thirsty, my friends? The Blessed One is a person of great miracles and great power. Go, take refuge in the Blessed One. By the power of the Blessed One, the pool will again be as it was.” Hearing the deity’s advice, the five hundred sages were elated. In their joy they went to see the Blessed One, and upon their arrival they implored the Blessed One for his forgiveness and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. [200.a]
$635 The Blessed One directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where they sat, Having seen the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and made this request of the Blessed One: “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$636 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods. After the Blessed One had led them to go forth and ordained them, he disappeared from the forest and traveled to the garden of Prince Jeta.
$637 In the meantime, the brahmins and householders of faith had heard that five hundred monks had taken up residence in the forest, so they built a monastery in the forest that was complete in every respect [200.b] and offered it to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks.
$638 The monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, what action did the five hundred monks take that ripened into their pleasing the Blessed One and not displeasing him, and that they went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$639 “Lord, where did they make these prayers?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, they went forth in his doctrine and practiced pure conduct all their lives.
$640 “At the time of their deaths they prayed, ‘While we may not have attained any great virtues, still we have gone forth in the teaching of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all our lives. By this root of virtue, may we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$641 “O monks, what do you think? The five hundred monks who went forth then are none other than these five hundred monks. At that time they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths they prayed, [201.a] ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$642 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The One Who Heard
$643 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there was a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with glowing, golden skin and a well-rounded head, long arms, a broad brow, a fine and prominent nose, and eyebrows that met. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$644 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. As he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, [201.b] and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$645 His father built three houses for him—one for summer, one for winter, and one for spring—with three different gardens, and the son married three wives, a primary wife, a middling wife, and a lesser wife. He would stay up on the roofs of his palatial homes in the company of the women, reaping the fruits of his merit as they played music, enjoyed themselves, and coupled.
$646 One day in the spring, when many trees were in bloom and the parrots, mountain birds, cuckoos, peacocks, and jīvaṃjīva birds began to call out, he strode into his garden grove with his attendants, and they began to enjoy themselves and couple amid a flourish of cymbals.
$647 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$648 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, [202.a] lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$649 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$650 The Blessed One knew that the time had come to tame the householder’s son, so he emanated another garden nearby, and in that garden he began teaching the Dharma to a great crowd of people with a voice like Brahmā. The householder’s son heard the Blessed One’s voice ringing out in the garden, and thought, “I have never heard a human voice like this before.” He found it marvelous. “I will go and find out who could have such a voice,” he thought.
$651 Following the sound into the next garden, the householder’s son and his servants saw the Blessed Buddha. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart.
$652 He saw the Blessed Buddha, and the sight of him filled him with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture [202.b] as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$653 Seeing the Blessed Buddha in this way, the householder’s son felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he went to see the Blessed One, touched the top of his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took a seat at one side. The Blessed One directly apprehended the thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, and nature of the householder’s son, and taught him the Dharma accordingly.
$654 When he heard it, the householder’s son destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat. Having seen the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$655 “Have you informed your parents?” the Blessed One asked.
“I have not, Lord.”
“Young man,” the Blessed One said, “the buddhas and their disciples neither lead novices to go forth nor confer full ordination on young persons without their parents’ permission. Go and ask your parents, then come back here. This will make things easier for you later on.”
$656 “I shall do as the Blessed One has instructed,” said the young man, and he heeded the Blessed One’s advice and approached his parents. “Mother, Father,” he said, “I ask for your kind permission to go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One.”
“We shall not be able to stop him,” thought his parents, so they told him, “You have our permission, child. [203.a] And should you achieve any special attainments, please come see us.”
“I shall,” he replied.
$657 Then the young man returned to see the Blessed One. Upon his arrival he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested him again, “Lord, now that my parents have given me their consent, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$658 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led the householder’s son to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$659 After he attained arhatship he established his parents in the truths. He inspired them to give gifts and to share what they had, until their home became like an open well for those in need.
$660 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did this householder’s son take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that he pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him; [203.b] that he went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship; and that by entrusting themselves to him, the people of his house pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$661 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks, in times past, in the ninety-first eon, when people lived as long as eighty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Vipaśyin was in the world, he performed all of the deeds of a buddha and then passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates, like a fire when all the wood is gone.
$662 “The king of the city of Bandhumatī built a reliquary stūpa and was preparing to raise the life pillar#123 when a great crowd gathered. So the king exhorted them, ‘Whoever generates the most wealth on behalf of this stūpa will raise the stūpa’s life pillar.’
$663 “A certain householder’s son in that region heard of the king’s declaration, and an idea came to him, ‘If I can generate a lot of wealth on behalf of the stūpa, I shall get to raise the life pillar. I’m not that wealthy, but I will go see my family and generate some wealth.’
$664 “The householder’s son went to his family, and they said, ‘Be strong. You have to believe. Whatever wealth you generate, we will match.’ When he heard this, the young man immediately began to generate greater sums than the king, generating 600 million in gold#124 all together. [204.a]
$665 “The king was not pleased about this. ‘How can I harm this boy?’ he thought, and sat there, unhappy. His officer said to him, ‘Deva, I implore you, remain committed. You must believe. We shall offer our wealth to you, Deva.’
$666 “Many of the young man’s relatives tried to stop him. ‘Take care not to upset the king,’ they cautioned him. ‘One should not vie with a king.’ And the young man immediately relented.
$667 “The king was very pleased about this, for the life pillar of the stūpa would have been raised based on the donations given to the young man. In no time at all the stūpa was completed in every respect, and people made offerings to the stūpa of flowers, and burning sticks of incense, incense powders, and incense cones, and prepared for the traditional stūpa festival.
$668 “The householder’s son thought, ‘This 600 million in gold was donated for the stūpa. I don’t dare use it for myself. I shall offer all of it to the stūpa.’ So the young man and his relatives made a large offering to the stūpa, and the young man prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever we are born, may it be into families of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May we be well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. May we please and not displease a teacher just like this one. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$669 “ ‘Child,’ his relatives asked him, ‘what prayers are you making?’
“He told them what kind of prayers he was making, relating everything in detail, and as soon as they heard him they prayed in the same way, saying, ‘Entrusting ourselves to you alone, may we please and not displease a teacher just like this one.’ [204.b]
$670 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the householder’s son then is this young man. The act of venerating the stūpa and praying ripened such that he was born into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that he was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful.
$671 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Vipaśyin—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$672 “Those who were his relatives then are none other than these relatives of his. At that time they prayed, ‘Entrusting ourselves to you alone, may we please and not displease the Blessed One. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
“So it is, monks, that they have pleased me and not displeased me.”
$673 This concludes Part Four of The Hundred Deeds.
$674 1. The Story of Virūpa 2. The Story of Kṣemaṅkara 3. The Young Untouchable 4. The Story of Subhadra the Charioteer#125 5. The Story of Sahadeva 6. The Bull 7. The Story of Good Compassion 8. The Story of Fleshy 9. The Story of Black 10. The Story of Iṣudhara 11. The Man Who Was Trampled 12. The Story of Jackal
The Story of Virūpa
$675 As the Blessed One was traveling through the countryside in the land of Garga, he came to Mount Śiśumāri and stayed there in the deer park in The Terrifying Forest. On Mount Śiśumāri there lived a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. He took a wife of the same caste, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was ugly in eighteen different ways. [205.a]
$676 When his parents saw him they were wracked with suffering. “Though a son has finally been born to us,” they thought, “what good is he, with such singular flaws? He’d be better off dead—when night falls, we’ll toss him out and feed him to the dogs.”
$677 Then the householder’s wife said, “Not only is murder disgraceful, but if we commit such an act we will take rebirth as hell beings, so this we cannot do. Even though the child is flawed, let us raise him in some remote place. Then when he’s grown, we’ll throw him out of the house to seek his pitiful livelihood.”
$678 So the two of them raised the baby in a remote place. They named him Virūpa (Ugly), and as soon as he was grown, they threw him out of the house. Emaciated from hunger and thirst, he began to beg, carrying around a walking stick and a pot. Whenever he came to the door of a house, or to someplace where goods were kept, or to a shop, the people of the village would punch him, cuff him, pelt him with sticks and dirt clods, shout “Here comes a ghost!” and chase him away.
$679 He suffered greatly and wondered, “What nonvirtuous act did I commit that has ripened into such suffering for me now? Let me give up living in the city and leave to go begging from garden to garden. I shall find something to fill my stomach there.” With this thought he set out from the city.
$680 As he began making his way from garden to garden, the people there also thought he was a ghost. They punched him, cuffed him, pelted him with sticks and dirt clods, and chased him away. Finally, terrified of being beaten and terrified of people, he went into the thick of the forest and spent his days there, walking after sundown from garden to garden, [205.b] nourishing himself only with whatever food fell to the ground. Now it is impossible and out of the question for a being in their final existence to die an untimely death. Thus, he found just enough to stay alive there.
$681 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$682 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$683 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail. [206.a]
$684 The Blessed One knew that the time had come to tame young Virūpa, and entered into meditative absorption in cessation.#126 Then the Buddha rose from his meditative absorption in cessation just to tame young Virūpa, emanating a form with features even uglier than his. Then, after filling a vessel with food and drink, he set out to see young Virūpa.
$685 When young Virūpa saw the Blessed One in the distance he fled, thinking, “This person is coming to beat me!” But the Blessed One performed a miracle of preventing the young man from fleeing. The Buddha’s miracle also caused Virūpa to wish to see the Blessed One.
$686 “I would like to know who that is,” he thought, and came walking back. As soon as young Virūpa saw the emanation’s extraordinarily ugly features he began to wonder, “Who could this be?” so he went to where the Buddha’s emanation stood.
$687 The Buddha’s emanation saw young Virūpa, and made as if to run away. Young Virūpa called to him, “You’ve already seen me, friend. Why are you running away?”
The Buddha’s emanation replied, “By the ripening of my past actions, my friend, my form has become like this. I was afraid you might beat me, thinking that I am a ghost, so I ran.”
$688 “It was likewise by the ripening of actions of my past lives that I gained these unattractive features, my friend,” said young Virūpa “Because of my unattractive features my parents threw me out of the house. As I went wherever I could for alms, I was punched, cuffed, and pelted with sticks and dirt clods, and chased away, until I lived in terror of being beaten and chased away. In terror of being beaten by people, I went into the thick of the forest, and there I have stayed—that is, until you came along. Let’s be friends and make our way together.”
$689 “Let’s do that,” the emanation said, and he sat down there and divided his food with Virūpa. [206.b] After they had filled their bellies with food and drink until they were quite content, young Virūpa felt joy toward the emanation. Then the Blessed One made his own unattractive features disappear and assumed his natural form.
$690 Young Virūpa beheld the Blessed One. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When young Virūpa saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled him with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not experienced even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years. Thus seeing the Blessed One, he felt a surge of joy toward him, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$691 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. Hearing it, the young man destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where he sat.
$692 After seeing the truths he thought, “If my body weren’t like this, I too would go forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, in order to ford the floodwaters and completely escape my fetters with diligence, practice, and effort.” No sooner did he wish to go forth than his unattractive features disappeared and he became well proportioned and handsome, endowed with the finest of complexions.
$693 He felt another surge of joy toward the Blessed One, rose from his seat, [207.a] drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and made this request of the Blessed One: “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya monastic discipline of the Dharma so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$694 With the words “Come, join me, monk!” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$695 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed One, “what action did young Virūpa take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that his appearance had eighteen unattractive features, and that because of his unattractive features he was cast from the house by his parents; that as soon as he felt a sense of renunciation, the unattractive features went away and he had a fine face and form; and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$696 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that Virūpa committed and accumulated: [207.b]
“Monks, in times gone by, in a certain mountain village there lived a miserly, avaricious householder who hoarded all his belongings. This was during a time when blessed buddhas were not in the world, and so solitary buddhas had arisen. One day when he was at home, a solitary buddha came to the householder’s home for alms. The householder gave alms to him and then regretted having given him alms.
$697 “ ‘Better to eat the vegetables myself or to give them to someone who works than to give them to this monk who’s got only a shaved head to show for himself!”#127 Now regretful, he stole back the food, and chased the sage away from the house, cruelly intending to physically and verbally abuse him.
$698 “The solitary buddha thought, ‘It’s not right for this emotionally afflicted person, who has become so abased, to continue in this downward spiral. I have to help him.’ So he rose up into the sky, making a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning.
$699 “Ordinary people are quickly brought to faith through miracles, so when he saw all this, the householder bowed down at the sage’s feet like a tree felled by a saw and said, ‘O great fortunate one, please come down! I’m mired in misdeeds! Please reach down and lift me up!’ Solely out of compassion for him, the solitary buddha descended.
$700 “The householder bowed down at his feet, asked his forgiveness, gave him alms, and prayed, ‘May no portion of the act of harming this person so worthy of offerings ripen to me. By the root of virtue of having thus venerated him again, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. [208.a] May I achieve such great virtues. Should it be the case that this nonvirtue must certainly bear fruit, then as soon as I feel a sense of renunciation, may my unattractive features disappear and may I become well proportioned and handsome.’
$701 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that householder then is none other than Virūpa. The acts of giving alms to the solitary buddha, then stealing them back and chasing him away from the house, cruelly intending to physically and verbally abuse him, ripened such that wherever he was born, he had unattractive features and was cast out of the house. The act of giving alms to the solitary buddha again and praying, ‘Wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease a teacher even more exalted than this. May I achieve such great virtues,’ ripened such that wherever he was born it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$702 “Monks, I am more exalted than even one hundred billion solitary buddhas, and now he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$703 “He also went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Then, having practiced pure conduct all his life, at the time of his death he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin [208.b] prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$704 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Story of Kṣemaṅkara
$705 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, King Prasenajit reigned in the city of Śrāvastī, and King Brahmadatta reigned in Vārāṇasī. The two did not agree with one another, and at various times a great many people were killed.
$706 One day King Brahmadatta arrayed the four divisions of his army—the elephant division, the horse division, the chariot division, and the infantry division—and advanced on the kingdom of King Prasenajit to wage war. King Brahmadatta made camp and stayed on the banks of the Ajiravatī River. King Prasenajit heard that Brahmadatta , King of Kāśi, had arrayed the four divisions of his army to wage war, had made camp, and was staying on the banks of the Ajiravatī River, so he also arrayed the four divisions of his army and advanced toward King Brahmadatta to wage war and made camp, staying on the banks of the Ajiravatī River. Over time, many people were slaughtered as the two groups camped there. Both sides were powerful, and neither could defeat the other. [209.a]
$707 Time passed, and one day while they were camped there King Brahmadatta ’s queen conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, and as soon as she was born, celebratory music resounded from the palace.
$708 King Prasenajit heard that a daughter had been born to King Brahmadatta who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. As soon as he heard this, his spirits lifted, and he thought, “I’ve found a way to become King Brahmadatta ’s kin. Because of this little child there will be no more resentment between us.”
$709 King Prasenajit sent an envoy to King Brahmadatta with the following message: “Let there be no more resentment, my friend. Because of your daughter there will be no more resentment. Hand your daughter to me in marriage.”
$710 As soon as King Brahmadatta heard this, his spirits lifted too and he thought, “Over time he and I have both slaughtered many people. But because of my daughter there will be no more resentment between us.”#128 He sent an envoy with his response: “As you wish.”
$711 The two kings met, embraced, and King Brahmadatta pledged his daughter and returned to his own country. Upon returning to his country, he held an elaborate feast celebrating her birth, and asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named her, saying, “Since her birth brought happiness to the two kingdoms, her name will be Kṣemaṅkarā (She Who Brings Happiness).” They raised young Kṣemaṅkarā on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids.
$712 Now desires are like salt water—the more you use to slake your thirst, the more you need. So one day, King Brahmadatta ’s queen conceived again, and when nine or ten months had passed, [209.b] she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. They held another elaborate feast, celebrating his birth, and they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since this child was born after his sibling Kṣemaṅkarā, his name will be Kṣemaṅkara (He Who Brings Happiness).”
$713 They raised young Kṣemaṅkara on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. When they grew up, young Kṣemaṅkarā and Kṣemaṅkara became close friends, and could not bear to be apart for even a moment.
$714 Then one day King Prasenajit sent an envoy to King Brahmadatta with the message, “We will receive your daughter now.” As soon as King Brahmadatta heard this, he sent an envoy with the message, “There is nothing preventing this, so please come on such-and-such a date.”
$715 King Prasenajit responded, “As you wish,” and with great opulence and a great display of royal power he traveled to Kāśi, where King Brahmadatta handed his daughter to him in accordance with the customs of householders. Afterward, King Prasenajit bore the girl back to his own country.
$716 Young Kṣemaṅkara said to his parents, “I can’t bear to be without my elder sister, Kṣemaṅkarā.#129 I shall be with her again.”
“My child,” King Brahmadatta replied, “you are my precious, beloved only son—my regent. After I pass away, you will have to become king. It wouldn’t be right for you to go to another country.” Many times the king tried to impede him from going, but he was not able to stop him.
Then King Prasenajit said, “Deva, I shall protect brother and sister both. If he comes it changes#130 nothing,” and King Brahmadatta [210.a] replied, “As you wish.”
$717 King Prasenajit took young Kṣemaṅkarā and Kṣemaṅkara both to Śrāvastī. King Prasenajit had the young man study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$718 Now the young man was unruly and careless, and he had intercourse with a sex worker. He broke some one hundred of the country’s laws, and though his sister Kṣemaṅkarā and King Prasenajit tried, they were not able to stop him. Finally King Prasenajit sent an envoy to King Brahmadatta with the message, “Since your son has been here, he has done about a hundred vulgar things, and though we have tried, we have not been able to stop him.”
$719 Immediately upon hearing this, King Brahmadatta sent a message to his son: “My child, come back here. Don’t stay there anymore. After my death it will be necessary for you to take on the dominion of the king. Don’t act in such a vulgar manner. Live here.”
Still, Kṣemaṅkara ignored his father’s message and did not return to his country. After he refused to give up his careless ways, King Brahmadatta , unable to stop him, finally disowned him. King Prasenajit [210.b] also gave up on him and no longer permitted him to enter the royal palace.
$720 One day he wished to enter the royal palace, and though the doorkeeper physically restrained him, he forced his way inside. “I will see my sister!” he insisted, and took a seat at the queen’s door. King Prasenajit and Queen Kṣemaṅkarā were inside playing lutes, and young Kṣemaṅkara, bow in hand, overheard them. In anger he let loose an arrow, hoping to kill King Prasenajit. The arrow severed a string of the king’s lute and fell to the ground.
As soon as King Prasenajit saw this he fled in terror. Then, seething with anger, he thought, “If I kill him in some ordinary manner, King Brahmadatta too will come to shame. So I will convict him in a court of law and have him executed.”
$721 It was King Prasenajit’s custom that when a trial was to be held, if the dispute was trivial, two intertwined conches were sounded, and if the dispute was grave, the two intertwined conches were sounded over the beating of a great drum. In this case King Prasenajit had them sound both. As soon as this was heard, every high functionary in Śrāvastī gathered in the royal palace. King Prasenajit convicted the young man in court, draped his neck with garlands of oleander flowers, and handed him over to the executioners.
$722 Clad in black , the executioners unsheathed their swords, and with a thundering of drums they led him to the crossroads on the main highway. As they neared the place where he was to be executed, young Kṣemaṅkara cried for mercy, flailed all about, and thought, “Who can protect me from such desolation, distress, and suffering? Who can save my precious life?”
$723 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, [211.a] in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$724 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$725 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$726 The Blessed One knew that the time had come to tame young Kṣemaṅkara, so he donned his lower garment and Dharma robes, and, carrying his alms bowl, went for alms in Śrāvastī. Young Kṣemaṅkara saw the Blessed One in the distance. Upon seeing him, he approached the Blessed One, [211.b] bowed down at the Blessed One’s feet, and pleaded, “Blessed One, Blessed One, please take on the difficult task of saving my precious life!”
$727 “Young man,” the Blessed One said, “don’t be afraid. Your life will not be lost.” Then the Blessed One spoke to the executioners, saying, “My friends, release this young man.”
“Do we look to you like we have spare heads?”#131 the executioners replied. “How can we release him, Blessed One?”
$728 “My friends,” the Blessed One requested, “hold him a little while, until I have met with the king.”
“As you wish, Blessed One,” they replied.
$729 So the Blessed One went to see King Prasenajit. Upon arriving, the Blessed One addressed the king, saying, “Great King, release this young man.”
“Lord,” the king replied, “if he goes forth, I shall release him.”
$730 At that, King Prasenajit countermanded his execution and offered him to the Blessed One. The Blessed One took the young man to the garden of Prince Jeta, led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship.
$731 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “please tell us why the unruly Prince Kṣemaṅkara had been sent to his death, and the Blessed One rescued him and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$732 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, he was unruly and committed sexual misconduct, Brahmadatta sent him to be executed, and I rescued him, placing him in the four meditative states and five superknowledges. [212.a] Listen well!
$733 “Monks, in times past during King Brahmadatta’s#132 reign in the city of Vārāṇasī, there lived a certain man in Vārāṇasī who was unruly and lascivious, and who had the whole city in turmoil. A crowd seized him and presented him to King Brahmadatta, and King Brahmadatta sent him to be executed. As the executioners were carrying him to the spot where he was to be executed, he became terrified of being executed and looked all about, thinking, ‘Who can take on the difficult task of saving my precious life?’
$734 “At that time, there was a certain sage living in the Vārāṇasī area who had all the five superknowledges and was a person of great miracles and great power. The man saw him approaching the vicinity of Vārāṇasī, and as soon as he saw him, he bowed down at his feet and said, ‘Sage, please undertake the difficult task of saving my precious life.’
“ ‘My friends,’ the sage told the executioners, ‘do not kill him. Release him instead.’
$735 “ ‘Do we look to you like we have spare heads?’ the executioners replied. ‘How can we release him, sage?’
“The sage said, ‘Hold him a little while, until I have met with the king.’ Then the sage went to see King Brahmadatta and implored him, ‘Great king, do not kill this man. Release him instead.’
$736 “ ‘Sage,’ King Brahmadatta replied, ‘if he goes forth, I shall release him.’
At that, King Brahmadatta sent a message countermanding the execution order and offered him to the sage. The sage brought him to a hermitage, led him to go forth, and instructed him. While staying in that very hermitage, the man generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$737 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was that man then is none other than this young man. [212.b] The one who was the king then is now King Prasenajit himself. At that time he sent the man to be executed, and I rescued him, led him to go forth, and placed him in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well he was sent to be killed by King Prasenajit, and I rescued him and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$738 “Lord,” the monks asked, “what action did Prince Kṣemaṅkara take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$739 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?”
“Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, he went forth in his doctrine and acted as steward for the monks.
$740 “He acted as steward of the saṅgha in accord with the Dharma, and progressed in meditative stabilization on love. He practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$741 “Monks, [213.a] what do you think? The monk who acted as steward then is now none other than Prince Kṣemaṅkara. At that time he acted as steward in accord with the Dharma, cultivated the meditative stabilization on love, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$742 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$743 “By acting as steward in accord with the Dharma he was born into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. He cultivated the meditative stabilization on love, and so he was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful.”
The Young Untouchable
$744 When the Blessed One was dwelling near the city of Ujjayinī, in Śiṃśapā forest north of town, King Pradyota reigned in Ujjayinī, and King Udaya reigned in Suvīra. The two were dear friends, and from time to time they sent envoys to each other bearing gifts.
$745 There were hardly any mangoes in King Pradyota’s country, so the king of Suvīra sent gifts of many mangoes to please King Pradyota. King Pradyota gave some to the queen, some to his sons, and some to his ministers. Then King Caṇḍapradyota himself ate some of the mangoes, [213.b] and the thought came to him, “Here in my country there are no mangoes, so I’ll plant these mango pits in the garden.” He took those mango pits and planted them in his own garden, and before long the trees grew big, and there was a large grove with mature branches. Later, the trees blossomed and bore fruit, and King Pradyota charged some untouchables with protecting the mangoes so they would not be eaten by others.
$746 One day the untouchables ate the mangoes themselves. They shouted, “Thieves! Thieves!” and claimed, “Thieves ate them.”
King Caṇḍapradyota was suspicious, and thought, “Perhaps the untouchables have eaten the mangoes themselves.” He sent his servants to search the untouchables’ dwellings. After they went there and saw remnants of the mangoes, the royal servants informed King Pradyota. Then, in a fit of anger, King Caṇḍapradyota corralled all the untouchable families back into their dwellings, heaped up dry grass all around the dwellings, and set fire to it, burning them to the ground.
$747 One of the young untouchables from the village who felt embarrassed about the way the untouchables had acted had already gone south. After he left he took on the guise of a brahmin and trained in the science of invisibility. Having mastered it he later returned to the city of Ujjayinī, where, on the way to his house, he saw that the entire village had burned to the ground.
$748 When he saw this he asked, “Who destroyed our village?” and was told, “It was King Caṇḍapradyota.”
“Where did my family go?” he asked.
“In a fit of anger, King Caṇḍapradyota surrounded their houses with heaps of dry grass,” they said, “and he and his servants burned them up in the fire.” [214.a]
$749 The young man was devastated when he heard all this. “In truth it was the men’s fault, and they have been dealt with according to the law,” he thought. “But the children and the women did him no harm at all, and they too were burned up in the fire. I will take revenge on the king of our wicked age.”
$750 He made himself invisible, entered the royal palace, and struck the king on the head with a whip. “King of our wicked age!” he said. “What harm did the untouchables ever do to you?”
“They stole my mangoes!” replied King Caṇḍapradyota.
$751 “The men were to blame,” said the young untouchable, “but what did their wives and children do wrong? Put your affairs in order, vile king. Your life is at its end, for in seven days you must die!”
Every day after that the young untouchable went to the royal palace to beat the king and to say, “On such-and-such a date you will be no more!”
$752 King Caṇḍapradyota was terrified, and his ministers entreated him, “Deva, don’t be afraid. We will make supplications to Noble Kātyāyana.”
The ministers approached Venerable Kātyāyana and implored him, “Noble one, disembodied spirits are doing harm to the king. We ask you, please protect him!” As soon as Noble Kātyāyana heard this, he counteracted the young untouchable’s secret mantra so that he could never become invisible again.
$753 The young man thought, “Who destroyed my mantra?” and he asked the ministers, “Tell me, who protected the king from fear of disembodied spirits?” [214.b]
“Kātyāyana did, noble one,” the ministers replied.
When he heard this, the young untouchable immediately went to see Venerable Kātyāyana and asked, “Lord, why did you neutralize my mantra?”
“Sit down child,” Kātyāyana replied, “and I shall tell you in detail.”
$754 The young untouchable bowed down at Noble Kātyāyana’s feet and sat before him, and Venerable Kātyāyana taught him the Dharma in a gradual way, in a manner agreeable to him. When he heard it the young untouchable destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry.
$755 After seeing the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward Venerable Kātyāyana with palms pressed together, and requested, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$756 Venerable Kātyāyana led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$757 When the ministers heard this, [215.a] they told King Caṇḍapradyota, “Deva, Noble Kātyāyana has led the one who terrified you so to go forth.” As soon as he heard this, the king joyfully went to see Noble Kātyāyana, bowed down at his feet, and said, “Noble one, you undertook the difficult task of saving my precious life. Please permit me to invite you, together with the saṅgha of monks, to take your meals at my house for seven days.”
$758 “Deva,” Kātyāyana said, “the Blessed One is staying right here in Ujjayinī. Therefore, you should invite the Blessed One instead.”
No sooner had he heard this than the king went to see the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a discourse on the Dharma, and then sat in silence.
$759 Knowing that the Blessed One had completed his discourse, King Caṇḍapradyota rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and asked the Blessed One, “Out of solicitude for Noble Kātyāyana, please permit me to invite you, together with the saṅgha of monks, to take your meals at my house for seven days.” The Blessed One assented to King Caṇḍapradyota by his silence.
$760 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, King Caṇḍapradyota then praised this assurance from the Blessed One, rejoiced, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took leave of him.
$761 After [215.b] he had offered food to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for seven days inside the palace, on the last day he offered food of a hundred flavors to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe. He offered a set of robes fashioned from cotton to each of the other monks, and after the Blessed One had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a discourse on the Dharma, he rose from his seat and departed.
$762 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “what action did the young untouchable take that ripened such that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Buddha, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that he committed and accumulated:
$763 “Monks, in times past, in the ninety-first eon, when people lived as long as eighty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Vipaśyin was in the world, he performed all the activities of a buddha and passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates, like a fire when all the wood is gone.
$764 “King Bandhumat#133 used his great fortune to heap up fragrant wood in a wide open space and burned all of Buddha Vipaśyin’s remains in a fire. Then he interred the relics so that others would not remove them, [216.a] and charged a nearby group of untouchables with protecting them. One night, as the untouchables were sleeping there, a tiger in the area carried one of them off. One of the others cried out in terror, ‘I bow down to the Buddha!’ and by the power of the Buddha, the gods protected him.
$765 “Then King Bandhumat built a stūpa for the relics of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Vipaśyin. When it was complete in every respect and the time came to celebrate its traditional festival, the thought occurred to that untouchable, ‘It is by the power of the Blessed Buddha that I am alive at all.’ Knowing this, he made a large offering to the stūpa and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, may I please and not displease a teacher just like this one. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$766 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that young untouchable then is none other than this young untouchable. At that time he venerated the stūpa and made those prayers.
“So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Vipaśyin—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$767 “Later, he also went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Quarrelsome as a monk, he became a scholar. At that time out of anger he called a group of monks untouchables. One day [216.b] he felt regret, asked forgiveness of the monks, and practiced the conduct leading to liberation all his life. While he may not have attained any great virtues, at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$768 “O monks, what do you think? The monk who went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa then is none other than this untouchable. At that time the act of calling a group of monks untouchables ripened such that for five hundred lifetimes he took rebirth as a untouchable. He also practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$769 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Story of Subhadra the Charioteer
$770 King Śuddhodana had a certain charioteer named Subhadra.#134 When the time came for him to marry, [217.a] he took a wife. But even though they enjoyed themselves and coupled, they had no children. They desired a son, so the householder supplicated the deities. He prayed to Paśupati, Varuṇa, Kubera, Śakra, Brahmā, and the rest, and to the deities of the pleasure groves, the forest deities, the deities of the crossroads, the deities of forks in the road, the deities who receive strewn oblations, the deities of his inherited tradition, and the deities who are in constant attendance of righteous persons. Although he made every effort to pray to them, he still could not have a son or a daughter.
$771 Then, when the Bodhisattva was born, the soothsayers prophesied, “If he remains here at home, he will become a universal monarch, but if he shaves his head and face and dons the colorful religious robes, and if with nothing short of perfect faith he goes forth from home to live as a mendicant, then he will be renowned throughout the world as a tathāgata, an arhat, a totally and completely awakened buddha.”
$772 Upon hearing these words, the charioteer Subhadra was devastated. “If I have a son,” he thought, “he will become charioteer to the prince, and our lineage of charioteers will not be broken.” With that, he began making especially fervent prayers to all the deities.
$773 The Bodhisattva, upon witnessing old age, sickness, and death, went to live in the forest, where he practiced austerities for six years. After practicing austerities there for six years, from the young women Nandā and Nandabalā#135 of Serika village he accepted honeyed porridge prepared from milk that had been made into cream sixteen times over.
$774 Then he accepted grass from Svastika the grass peddler. Then the nāga king Kāla praised him highly, and he proceeded to Bodhimaṇḍa. There he laid the grass out smooth, [217.b] sat down cross-legged, and made a firm commitment to himself: “Until such time as I attain the highest wisdom,” he thought, “I shall not give up this cross-legged posture.” On that spot, he conquered the thirty-six million beings of Māra’s retinue and achieved unexcelled, total, and complete wisdom.
$775 Then, beseeched by Brahmā three times, he enumerated the four truths of the noble ones three times in Vārāṇasī, properly setting in motion the wheel of the Dharma in its twelve aspects, and led the group of five to go forth. After he had established another five in the truths, as well as a party of sixty fathers, the sons of fifty village chieftains, and the two siblings Nandā and Nandabalā, he led the brothers Uruvilvā Kāśyapa and Nadī Kāśyapa to go forth and traveled on to Gayā.
$776 He tamed others with three types of miraculous displays, traveling to the Forest of Reeds, where he established in the truths King Bimbisāra, eight thousand gods, and the hundreds and hundreds of brahmins and householders of Magadha. Then he went to Rājagṛha, where he accepted the gift of Bamboo Grove, and led Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana to go forth.
$777 He proceeded to Śrāvastī, subjugated King Prasenajit through the discourse on “the similes of the young ones,”#136 accepted the gift of the garden of Prince Jeta, and went to stay in Kapilavastu, where he was reunited with his father and son. With support from Kapilavastu he lived on to act for the benefit of those to be tamed.
$778 Thereupon the thought occurred to Subhadra , “Seeing as I have no heir, after I die all I have will become the king’s property. I will bring it to bear on my next life.”#137 So the next day he invited the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for a meal and with his own hands contented them with many good, wholesome foods, proffering all that they wished. Once he knew that their bowls had been taken away and their hands washed, he brought in a very low seat [218.a] and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a discourse on the Dharma. Once he had instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a great variety of Dharma discourses, he sat there silently.
$779 Knowing that the Blessed One had completed his discourse, the charioteer Subhadra said to the Blessed One, “Lord, you will be my teacher for a long time. If I’d had a son, he would have been charioteer to you, the prince, just as I have been charioteer to King Śuddhodana. Now the Blessed One has gone forth, but if I have a son, I shall offer him to the Blessed One as an attendant just the same.” The Blessed One saw the good it would bring and said, “The virtuous keep their promises.” Then he left the house, and returned whence he came.
$780 One day, the charioteer Subhadra ’s wife finally conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since he is Subhadra ’s child, his name will be Bhadra.”
They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake.
$781 As he grew up he studied letters, tallying, and arithmetic; [218.b] the study of seals, lending, deposits, and commerce; and the examination of cloth, jewels, gems, incense, medicine, elephants, horses, and arms and armor. He became skilled in writing, skilled at reading, learned, decisive, and industrious, a master of the eight types of examination.
$782 One day, the Blessed One saw that the time had come for the young man to go forth, so he reminded the charioteer Subhadra , “ Subhadra , before this child was born you offered him to me. The virtuous keep their promises, do they not? Didn’t you yourself make such a promise?”
$783 “Yes, Blessed One,” Subhadra replied, “I did make just such a promise.” As he said this, he took the child by his two hands, offered him to the Blessed One, and told him, “Child, before you were born, I offered you to the Blessed One. Therefore go, and be an attendant of the Blessed One.”
“This will be of benefit to me,” the child said, and with those words he followed the Blessed One away.
$784 The Blessed One instructed, encouraged, inspired, and delighted him with a great variety of Dharma teachings. Then the Blessed One led the child away and traveled to the monastery. There, the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship.
$785 After achieving arhatship he thought, “The Blessed One has dispelled so many kinds of suffering and anguish, brought me so many kinds of happiness and bliss, [219.a] cleared away so many of my sins and nonvirtues, and secured for me such virtues. How could I repay the kindness of the Blessed One?” Then he thought, “Anytime a buddha arises in the world, it is only to benefit beings. So undoubtedly I too should act for the benefit of beings!” Reflecting in this way, he wondered, “Whom might I tame?” When he looked out, right away he saw he could tame his own parents. So he disappeared from the monastery, and burst forth right in front of them from the floor of their house. Like a regal swan spreading its wings before them, he rose into the sky, making a miraculous display of fire and light, rain and lightning, and descended to the earth.
$786 He directly apprehended their thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperaments, capacities, and natures, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. When they heard it they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$787 After they saw the truths they said, “Child, we are also going to give up living at home and go forth just as you were.”
“As you wish,” Bhadra replied, and he left the house.
$788 Thereupon his parents gave up household affairs, gave gifts, made merit, and went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One. Casting away all afflictive emotions with diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship.
$789 “Blessed One,” the monks asked, [219.b] “what action did Bhadra take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?
$790 “What actions did his parents take that ripened into their trusting him completely, and that they pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of their prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$791 “Lord, where did they make these prayers?”
“Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as forty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Krakucchanda was in the world, he performed all the activities of a buddha and passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates, like a fire when all the wood is gone.
$792 “King Śobha performed a reliquary offering for the Blessed One’s relics and began to cover the stūpa and the entire surrounding area within one mile with four different kinds of jewels. The minister he had appointed to oversee this had no faith, and told his son, ‘My child, I must complete this task on behalf of the king in addition to executing the royal duties. [220.a] If I can’t handle both, I shall lose my position at the royal palace. Therefore, my child, please supervise work on the stūpa, and I shall serve the king.’
“ ‘As you wish, father,’ the young man said, and he remained there to supervise the work on the stūpa.
$793 “He began to work on the stūpa, and as he was working there, he found faith in the doctrine of the Buddha Krakucchanda, so he went for refuge and took the fundamental precepts. Then he led his parents to live a life of perfect faith and to likewise take refuge and the fundamental precepts.
$794 “King Śobha completed every aspect of the stūpa and made great offerings to it. At the beginning of the traditional stūpa festival, the minister, his wife, his servants,#138 and his son were elated to see that every aspect of the stūpa had been completed in full, and they made a large offering to the stūpa. The minister’s son bowed down at the foot of the stūpa and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I be well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. May I please and not displease a teacher just like this one. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$795 “When his parents saw this, they asked, ‘Child, what prayers are you making?’
“He told them everything in detail, and when they heard it, right away they both prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever [220.b] we are born, may it be into families of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May he be our son. Entrusting ourselves to him completely, may we please and not displease a teacher just like this one. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$796 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the minister’s son then is none other than Subhadra . Those who were his parents then are none other than his parents now. The act of venerating the stūpa and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever they were born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$797 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Krakucchanda—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$798 “His parents’ acts of venerating the stūpa and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever they were born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. By entrusting themselves to their son completely, they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$799 “The three of them also went forth in the doctrine of Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all their lives then, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.” [221.a]
The Story of Sahadeva
$800 When King Siṃhahanu reigned in Kapilavastu, and King Suprabuddha reigned in Devaḍaha,#139 the two were dear friends. One day King Siṃhahanu thought, “How wonderful it would be if a universal monarch was born in my lineage!” Subsequently he had four sons named Śuddhodana, Droṇodana, Amṛtodana, and Śuklodana, and four daughters named Śuddhā, Droṇā, Amṛtā, and Śuklā.
$801 After that, King Suprabuddha prayed, “How wonderful it would be to become kin with King Siṃhahanu!” He and the queen enjoyed themselves and coupled, she gave birth to a child, and they named him Sahadeva.
$802 As the young man grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge, and he was without peer.
$803 Later, King Suprabuddha had two daughters, and he named one Māyā and the other Mahā­māyā. [221.b] The brahmin astrologers and augurs prophesied this about the two of them: “One will give birth to a universal monarch. The other will give birth to a youth graced with the signs.” When King Siṃhahanu heard this, he took them both to be Śuddhodana’s queens.
$804 One day the Bodhisattva passed away and transmigrated from the Tuṣita Heaven and entered his mother’s womb. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a son. As he grew up, they made him study letters, and he mastered them. He also learned all the fields of knowledge. He mastered as well all the performing arts of dance, singing, and music.
$805 Then King Śuddhodana thought, “Now we must train him in archery.” So he asked the Śākyas, “Who here is the greatest teacher of archery from whom a young person can learn archery?”
“Deva, you can forget all other teachers of archery,” the Śākyas told him. “King Suprabuddha’s son Sahadeva is the greatest teacher of archery. None can rival him.”
As soon as he heard this, King Śuddhodana dispatched a messenger to Sahadeva, saying, “Sahadeva, please teach this prince archery.”
$806 “As you wish, Deva,” Sahadeva replied, and he began teaching the prince archery. The Bodhisattva learned everything he taught him. The Bodhisattva demonstrated other techniques that were not known in Sahadeva’s country, and Sahadeva was amazed upon witnessing the Bodhisattva’s discipline and these techniques that he had not seen before. He devoted himself to studying those archery techniques and learned them himself from the Bodhisattva.
$807 When the Bodhisattva witnessed old age, sickness, and death, [222.a] and went to live in the forest, Sahadeva traveled to Vaiśālī. While he was staying there, the people of Vaiśālī put five hundred youths in his care and said, “Train these youths in the five fields of knowledge.” By the time he had completed archery training for all five hundred youths, they had mastered the five fields of knowledge. After that they became arrogant and thought, “No one is our equal in form, strength, and knowledge—needless to speak of their being better!”
$808 “Don’t be so arrogant, children,” Sahadeva said. “You can’t equal even the dust under the feet of the prince born into the Śākya clan—needless to speak of his fine form, strength, and knowledge.”
Now as soon as they heard this, the youths were eager to see him and said, “We should go see this young man.”
“That young man lives in the forest,” Sahadeva told them, “so you cannot see him now.”
$809 In the meantime, while acting for the benefit of those to be tamed, the Blessed One eventually made his way to Vaiśālī. Sahadeva heard about this and informed the youths. As soon as they heard, the five hundred youths were very eager to see the Blessed One and they went with Sahadeva to meet him. All five hundred youths saw the Blessed One, resplendent and agreeable, in the distance. His senses were tamed and his mind was perfectly tame. He was graced with tranquility, shining and magnificent like a golden pillar.
$810 When they saw him, whatever arrogance they had about their own forms disappeared. But still#140 they thought, “In form he may be our superior, but not in strength.” Thinking this, they went to see the Blessed One, [222.b] and upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him.
$811 The Blessed One thought, “I must destroy their arrogance.” Then the Blessed One had a thought about the world: “How good it would be for Śakra, King of the Gods, to take up his bow and arrow and come to see me!” Just as the Buddha thought this, Śakra, King of the Gods, immediately came to see the Blessed One with bow and arrow in hand. Then, to shatter the youths’ arrogance, the Blessed One made his natural form disappear and emanated in the form of a deity. He then emanated seven iron palm trees, seven wheels, seven great drums, and seven bricks#141 close to where the youths stood and addressed them, saying, “Children, take up this bow and arrow, and fire arrows into these targets.”
$812 The youths hurried to take up the bow, but when he said, “Now draw,” they could not so much as pull the bowstring. The Blessed One, however, drew the bowstring with ease, and his arrow not only punctured the targets as it pierced the seven iron palm trees, seven wheels, seven great drums, and seven bricks, it even burrowed into the ground below.
$813 When they saw this, whatever arrogance the youths had about their own strength disappeared in an instant, and they gained admiration for the Blessed One. The Blessed One directly apprehended their admiration and taught them the Dharma accordingly. When they heard it, all five hundred youths destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where they sat.
$814 After seeing the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, [223.a] bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested of the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.”
$815 With the words “Come, join me, monks!” the Blessed One led them to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. They cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship. As arhats, free from the attachments of the three realms, their minds regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of their hands as like space itself. They became cool like wet sandalwood. Their insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. They achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. They had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. They became objects of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$816 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “tell us why, after all five hundred of these youths were put in the care of Sahadeva, the Blessed One shattered their arrogance and established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, they were put in Sahadeva’s care, and I destroyed their arrogance and placed them in the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Listen well!
$817 “Monks, in times gone by, King Glacier Lake Deity#142 reigned in the city of Campā. One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months [223.b] had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, beautiful, and endowed with tremendous strength. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, ‘What name should we give this child?’ And they named him, saying, ‘Since this is Glacier Lake Deity’s child, his name will be Glacier Deity.’ They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake.
$818 “As the young man grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$819 “Then he came to see that his father administrated the affairs of the kingdom both righteously and unrighteously. Recognizing this he thought, ‘After the death of my father, I will have to assume the dominion of the king. I will give up living at home and go live in the forest.’ Reflecting in this way, he asked for his father’s permission and went to live in the forest. After he went there, he generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$820 “After he had gone forth, the king’s ministers had five hundred sons. As they grew up, they were made to study letters and became educated in the five sciences. They thought [224.a] , ‘No one is our equal in form, strength, and knowledge—needless to speak of their being better!’
$821 “ ‘Children,’ their archery teacher told them, ‘don’t say such things. Your form, strength, and knowledge aren’t even a hundredth or a thousandth of that of the prince who went to live in the great forest.’
$822 “As soon as they heard this, the youths were eager to meet the sage, so they went to see him along with the archery teacher. All five hundred youths saw the sage in the distance and he was resplendent, agreeable, and happy. His senses were tamed, and his mind was at peace.#143 When they saw him, whatever arrogance they had about their own forms disappeared, and they thought, ‘Since his good qualities and the splendor of his form are as great as our teacher claimed, and we ourselves are certain it is so, let’s give up living at home and, in his presence, practice the conduct that leads to enlightenment.’ With this thought, they went forth in his presence. Having thus gone forth, they generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$823 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. Those who were the five hundred youths then are none other than these youths. The one who was their archery teacher then is none other than Sahadeva. At that time, after they were put in Sahadeva’s care, I destroyed their arrogance and placed them in the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Now as well, they have been in the sole care of Sahadeva, and I have established them in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$824 “They also went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa [224.b] and practiced pure conduct all their lives. At the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$825 “What do you think monks? The five hundred monks who went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa then are now none other than these renunciants. Back then they practiced pure conduct all their lives, and at the time of their deaths, they prayed, ‘May we please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. May we go forth in his doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$826 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that they have pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Bull
$827 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, not far from the garden of Prince Jeta there lived a certain herd of cattle. There, the two bulls that led the herd were fighting and kicking one another until one of them had his stomach gored and his intestines spilled out onto the ground. Still feeling a surge of hatred for his opponent, [225.a] he collapsed to the ground.
$828 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$829 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$830 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$831 The Blessed One thought, “If this bull dies in his present condition, he will take birth as a hell being. The time has come to lift him out of the lower realms.” [225.b] The Blessed One disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta and traveled to near where the bulls were. He put the intestines back into the bull’s stomach, sewed the wound closed, gave him grass and water, and said to him, “And so it is, my friend: all conditioned things are impermanent. All phenomena are selfless. Nirvāṇa is peace. Let your mind be filled with joy at the thought of me, and you may even be released from rebirth in the animal realm.”
$832 Filled with joy at the thought of the Blessed One, the bull died shortly thereafter, transmigrated, and took rebirth in the house of a merchant in Śrāvastī. After nine or ten months had passed the child was born, and he was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$833 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and when he was seven years of age, he found faith in the doctrine of the Blessed One. He asked for his parents’ permission and went forth, and though he was just seven years old, he cast away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, and manifested arhatship. After he manifested arhatship, he used his miraculous powers as a means of travel and would scoop flowers and fruits onto large leaves, carry them from one place to another, and bring them as offerings to the saṅgha.
$834 The monks were amazed when they saw this, so they requested the Blessed One, “Lord, tell us why this one, who went forth as a novice at just seven years of age, has achieved such great virtues.”
The Blessed One asked the monks, “Did you see the bull whose intestines I put back into his stomach, and to whom I taught three lines of the Dharma?”
“Yes, Lord, we saw him,” they replied.
$835 The Blessed One said, [226.a] “Filled with joy at the thought of me, he died, transmigrated, and was reborn in the house of a merchant here in Śrāvastī. Then he went forth in my very doctrine, and at just seven years of age cast away all afflictive emotions and manifested arhatship.”
$836 “Lord, what action did this novice take that ripened into his birth as a bull?” they inquired. “What action did he take that, after he died and transmigrated, ripened into his birth as a human being, and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, surpassed those whose lifespans were one hundred years, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that he committed and accumulated:
$837 “Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, he went forth in Buddha Kāśyapa’s doctrine, acted as water server for the monks, and distributed water from a small vase.
$838 “Another monk who was an arhat got distracted and bumped up against the serving monk, knocking the small vase from his hand and breaking it. In anger, the serving monk shouted at him, ‘This one’s like a thundering bull—huge and oblivious!’
“When he heard what he said, the arhat took him aside and asked, ‘Lord, do you know who I am?’
“ ‘I know that you have gone forth,’ he replied, ‘as have I.’
$839 “ ‘Though we two are like brothers in having gone forth,’ he said, ‘you are an ordinary person, bound [226.b] by every fetter, and I have been liberated from every fetter. You must confess the mistake you’ve made by speaking harshly to me. Otherwise you are certain to roam in saṃsāra and meet with the results of your ugly act.’
$840 “When he heard this the serving monk was seized with regret, bowed down at his feet, and asked his forgiveness. After that he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death he prayed, ‘May I not meet with the results of the act of speaking harshly to this person, so supremely worthy of offerings. While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$841 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the water-serving monk then is none other than this novice. The act of becoming angry and speaking harshly to the arhat ripened such that for five hundred lifetimes he took rebirth as a bull. Yet at the time of his death he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$842 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, [227.a] not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Story of Good Compassion
$843 When the Blessed One was in Vaiśālī, there lived a certain army chief named Siṃha. One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, beautiful, and endowed with tremendous strength. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him Good Compassion.
$844 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as the young man grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$845 But this was not enough to satisfy him,#144 and he had intercourse with prostitutes. His father sent him off with a group of friends, and one day in the spring, when many trees were in flower, and the parrots, mountain birds, cuckoos, peacocks, and jīvaṃjīva birds began to call out, the men brought the foremost courtesan into the forest. As they sat there, they began to quarrel over the courtesan. In anger, young Good Compassion killed three men in the group of friends.
$846 The group of friends [227.b] went and told the army chief Siṃha. When he heard about this, the army chief Siṃha declared, “That boy is no child of mine!” and threw him out of the house. The Licchavis of Vaiśālī sentenced him to death, draped his neck with garlands of oleander flowers, and handed him over to the executioners. Clad in black , the executioners unsheathed their swords, and with a thundering of drums they led him to the crossroads on the main highway. As they neared the place where he was to be executed, in terror for his life he cast all about, thinking, “Who can protect me from such desolation, distress, and suffering? Who can save my precious life?”
$847 The blessed buddhas, teachers of the one path to be traversed, with mastery over wisdom and the two types of knowable objects, in command of the three kinds of sterling equanimity, fearless by means of the fourfold fearlessness, freed from migration through the five destinies, keen in the six sense bases, practiced in the seven limbs of enlightenment, focused on the eight liberations, absorbed in the nine successive meditative absorptions, possessing all ten of the ten powers, whose proclamations are the great roaring of a perfect lion, by nature regard the world with their buddha eyes six times throughout the day and night—three times by day and three times by night.
$848 These are their thoughts as they look out in wisdom: “Who is in decline? Who will flourish? Who is destitute? Who is in a dreadful state? Who is being harmed? Who is destitute, in a dreadful state, and being harmed? Who is veering toward the lower realms? Who is descending through the lower realms? Who has descended to the lower realms? Whom shall I pull up from the lower realms, and establish in the resultant state of heaven and liberation? Whom, mired in misdeeds, shall I lift up by the hand? Whom, lacking the seven jewels of the noble ones, shall I lead to command of the seven jewels of the noble ones? Whom, not having produced roots of virtue, shall I lead to produce them? Whom, having already produced roots of virtue, [228.a] shall I lead to ripen their roots of virtue? Whom, having already ripened their roots of virtue, shall I slice open with the blade of wisdom? For whom shall I cause this world, adorned with a buddha’s presence, to be fruitful?”
$849 The ocean, home of creatures fierce, Could fail to send its tides on time. But when the time has come to tame Their offspring, buddhas never fail.
$850 The Blessed One thought, “The time has come to tame young Good Compassion.” He disappeared from the banks of Markaṭahrada and set out toward#145 young Good Compassion. Young Good Compassion saw the Blessed One from a distance. Drawing close, he bowed down at the feet of the Blessed One and implored the Blessed One, “Please undertake the difficult task of saving my precious life!”
$851 “Young man,” the Blessed One told him, “don’t be afraid. Your life will not be lost.” Then the Blessed One spoke to the people of Vaiśālī, saying, “My friends, what is the use of killing this young man? Release him.”
“Lord,” the people of Vaiśālī replied, “if he goes forth, we shall release him.”
$852 So the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship.
“Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why the people of Vaiśālī sentenced young Good Compassion to death because he could not be satisfied, prompting the Blessed One to rescue him and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$853 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, he could not be satisfied, [228.b] practiced sexual misconduct, and was sent by a crowd to be killed, whereupon I rescued him and placed him in the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$854 “Monks, in times gone by, in a mountain village there lived a certain villager who lacked in discernment, practiced sexual misconduct, and intended harm to many. But the villagers found a way to harm him instead, and they caught him in the act of adultery with another man’s wife. They presented him to the king, and the king sent him to be killed. The executioners led him away, and as they neared the place where he was to be executed, he spotted a sage who had been going about his business and living in a place on the mountain, devoted to austerities, not far from the villages. As soon as he saw him, he bowed down at his feet, and said, ‘O sage, please undertake the difficult task of saving my precious life!’ At this the sage led the king to release him, brought him to the place of his retreat, welcomed his renunciation, and there he generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$855 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was that man then is none other than this young man. At that time a crowd sentenced him to death, and I rescued him and placed him in the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Now as well, because he could not be satisfied, a crowd sentenced him to death, and I have rescued him and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$856 “He also went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, and after practicing pure conduct all his life, at the time of his death he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone [229.a] may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$857 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that monk then is none other than this Good Compassion himself. There he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$858 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
The Story of Fleshy
$859 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, a certain brahmin lived in Śrāvastī who had no children but desired a son. The householder made supplications to all the deities, and finally one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. He was already corpulent, full-fledged in skin, flesh, and blood. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since he is so corpulent, and full-fledged in skin, flesh, and blood, his name will be Fleshy.”
$860 They reared young Fleshy on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up, he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, [229.b] the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences.
$861 The brahmin’s house was not far from the house of Anāthapiṇḍada, and the young brahmin was an acquaintance of Anāthapiṇḍada, so he too was fond of the doctrine of the Blessed One.
$862 Then one day both the young brahmin’s parents died. After their death, he had to go to the city of Śūrpāraka on an errand. He traveled and traveled until eventually he came to a certain dense forest in the mountainous region between Śrāvastī and Śūrpāraka. In that dense forest there lived a certain sage. The young brahmin knew him and went to him, bowed down at his feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$863 Thereupon the sage spoke in praise of renunciation, and when he heard him the young brahmin immediately made up his mind to go forth. He went forth in the presence of the sage and lived in the forest, but he did not achieve anything of significance. One day the sage died, but Fleshy still stayed on at the hermitage.
$864 Then as the Blessed One was traveling to Śūrpāraka, young Fleshy saw the Blessed One approaching in the distance. As soon as he saw him, he thought, “That’s the ascetic of the Śākya clan—the omniscient, all-seeing one. Here he comes down the path! It wouldn’t be right for me not to show my respect and offer my help.” And he thought, “If I clamber down from this boulder on foot, the Blessed One will have passed by. I will leap from the boulder so that I can show my respect and offer my help.” [230.a] Having thought this, he leapt from the boulder.
$865 Just then the Blessed One blessed the ground so that it became like a cotton cushion stuffed with wool, and so that when young Fleshy landed, he sprang right back up on his feet, delighted. He went to where the Blessed One was, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and followed after him. Out of compassion for him, the Blessed One stepped off the path and sat down nearby. Again Fleshy touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet and then sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$866 The Blessed One taught him the Dharma particularly suited to him, and when he heard it he destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where he sat.
$867 After seeing the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested of the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$868 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. His state was such that Indra, Upendra, and the other gods [230.b] worshiped and venerated him and addressed him with respect. The Blessed One also commended him as foremost among the faithful and devoted.
$869 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why Venerable Fleshy leapt from a boulder when he saw the Blessed One, and why he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$870 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, upon seeing me he leapt from a boulder, went forth in my presence, and generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges. Listen well!
$871 “Monks, in times gone by, a certain sage was traveling a path with five hundred of his disciples. Upon reaching the face of a boulder, they took a seat at one side. There was an ascetic living on top of that boulder, practicing his austerities. He saw the sage sitting at the foot of the boulder, felt a surge of joy at the sight of him, and thought, ‘I will show my respect to that sage and offer my help.’ Then he thought, ‘But if I clamber down on foot, the sage will have left.’
$872 “So he leapt from the boulder, and as he did so the sage dispatched a deity who took him in his hands and placed him on the ground. Then the ascetic approached the sage, bowed down at his feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$873 “The sage spoke in praise of renunciation, and the ascetic went forth in his presence. After going forth, he generated the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$874 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was that ascetic then is none other than Fleshy. [231.a] At that time when he saw me he leapt from a boulder, went forth in my presence, and generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well, upon seeing me he leapt from a boulder, and went forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
$875 Again the monks inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, what action did Fleshy take that ripened such that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship, and that the Blessed One commended him as foremost among the faithful and devoted?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” the Blessed One replied.
$876 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?” they asked.
“Monks,” recounted the Blessed One, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world.
$877 “Traveling through the countryside with a retinue of twenty thousand attendants, he entered a certain dense forest where five hundred sages lived. The five hundred sages saw the Blessed One from a distance, and upon seeing him they experienced a surge of joy. In their joy they invited the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and his retinue to their forest devoted to austerities and there offered them roots and fruit. After making this offering, they sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$878 “The totally and completely awakened Kāśyapa directly apprehended their thoughts, [231.b] habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught them the Dharma accordingly. When they heard it, they destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where they sat.
$879 “Then all but one of the five hundred sages immediately realized the truths and manifested the resultant state of non-return. After they saw the truths, they rose from their seats, drew down the right shoulder of their upper garments, bowed toward the Blessed Buddha Kāśyapa with palms pressed together, and requested, ‘Lord, if permitted we wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete our novitiates, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, we too wish to practice the holy life.’
$880 “Then the totally and completely awakened Kāśyapa presented the five hundred sages to the monks, and the monks led all five hundred sages to go forth as novices, conferred on them full ordination, and instructed them. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, they manifested arhatship. But one sage there did not attain a single good quality—he did not so much as generate heat.
“The totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa commended the preceptor who had led them to go forth as foremost among the faithful and devoted.
$881 “After that, the one sage who did not attain anything practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘While I may not have attained any great virtues, still I have gone forth like this in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa and practiced pure conduct all my life. Therefore, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Just as [232.a] the Buddha Kāśyapa commended my abbot as foremost among the faithful and devoted, so may I too be commended by Śākyamuni, the most excellent King of Śākyas, as foremost among the faithful and devoted.’
$882 “O monks, what do you think? The one who went forth in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa then is none other than Fleshy. At that time he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship. Just as the Buddha Kāśyapa commended my abbot as foremost among the faithful and devoted, so may I too be commended by Śākyamuni, the most excellent King of Śākyas, as foremost among the faithful and devoted.
$883 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship, and I have commended him as foremost among the faithful and devoted.”
The Story of Black
$884 When the Blessed One was in Rājagṛha, there lived a brahmin named Bhūta . One day his wife conceived, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, beautiful, and had a very dark complexion. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since this child has a very dark complexion, his name can only be Black.” [232.b]
$885 Then they reared young Black on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. As he grew up, he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences.
$886 Black’s father taught brahmin mantras to some five hundred young brahmins. One day, when he had become old, he thought, “Now that I am old, I shall not be able to teach mantras to these five hundred young brahmins, so I will put a leader in charge of the group.” So the father instructed his son, “Black, my child, now that I am old, I shall not be able to teach mantras to these five hundred young brahmins. Since you are a master of mantras, you must lead these young brahmins in the study of mantras.”
“As you wish, my preceptor,” the young man replied, and after that he began teaching mantras to the five hundred young brahmins.
$887 Now, at that time there was another brahmin living in Rājagṛha who performed a sacrifice and offered many gifts to the brahmins. In the presence of the one who had performed the sacrifice, some of them said, “It is we who should collect these offerings. You others are not worthy to do so.”
Those of them who lived in town retorted, “We are pure, whereas you are servants of the king. Therefore it is we who should collect these offerings, and not you.”
$888 The brahmin Black thought, “These brahmins are so quarrelsome that no one will be able to appease them. I’d better be careful.” [233.a]
He tried to get between them, but he could not keep the brahmins from quarreling. This made him very sad. “I shall give up my retinue and go to live in the forest alone,” he thought, and he left behind his disciples and went into the forest.
$889 In that forest there lived a certain yakṣa, also named Black , who was fearsome and terrible. He drained the life out of others and caused suffering among thousands of beings. There lived a sage in that forest as well, and when the yakṣa saw him he felt a surge of joy.
$890 The brahmin Black saw the sage from a distance, and when he saw him, he too was filled with joy. In his joy he went forth in his presence, received instructions to ponder, and generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$891 Sometime later the elder sage died, and after his death, Sage Black went on living there. One day the people of Rājagṛha beseeched the Blessed One, “Lord, we feel no resentment toward Black the yakṣa, but he resents us so. We do not intend him harm, but he intends us harm, and he is harming thousands of beings. Lord, the Blessed One has tamed wicked nāgas like Nanda, Upananda , and others besides. You have tamed even the wicked yakṣa lord Aṭavika, and others besides. How wonderful it would be if, out of compassion, the Blessed One could tame Black the yakṣa as well.” The Blessed One assented to the people of Rājagṛha by his silence.
$892 The Blessed One used his miraculous powers to summon the yakṣa before him and said, “You must no longer harm beings. Give up these evil acts.”
“I shall do as the Blessed One says,” [233.b] the yakṣa replied, and he went for refuge and took the fundamental precepts. Then he further promised, “Lord, from this day forth I shall guard and protect the people of Rājagṛha.” Then he touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, took leave of the Blessed One, went back whence he came, and there he stayed.
$893 The yakṣa then thought, “Sage Black’s austerities are futile.” For he saw that in seven days Sage Black would be dead. Out of love, he went to see him and said, “Sage, what is the use of all your severe austerities? For seven days from now you will be dead.”
$894 The sage was devastated to hear this. Overcome by sadness, he lost his miraculous powers, and this caused him extraordinary sorrow. He sat there wailing until the yakṣa told him, “Don’t be so sad, sage. Don’t be troubled. The Blessed One is staying in Rājagṛha. He knows the course your death will take. Take refuge in the Blessed Buddha and all good things will be done for you.”
$895 As soon as he heard this, Sage Black cast all else aside and went to Bamboo Grove, where the Blessed One sat teaching the Dharma amid a company of hundreds. Sage Black saw the Blessed Buddha in the distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart. When he saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled him with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue [234.a] to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$896 Seeing the Blessed Buddha in this way, Sage Black was again filled with supreme joy. Full of such joy he went to see the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly.
$897 When he heard it, the young man destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where he sat.
$898 After seeing the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One: “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$899 With the words “Come, join me, monk!” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$900 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed One, “tell us why this sage [234.b] who was terrified of dying approached the Blessed One, whereupon the Blessed One led him to go forth and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
“Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way he was terrified of dying, and I led him to go forth and placed him in the four meditative states and five superknowledges.
$901 “Monks, in times gone by, there lived a sage in a certain hermitage who had all the five superknowledges—a person of great miracles and great power. He had one disciple, a young brahmin who was lazy and whose life was short. Even when he was being instructed, because of his exceptional laziness he could not stay focused.
$902 “One day the sage looked out and saw that in seven days the young brahmin would be dead. Knowing that he had not achieved anything at all, in order that the young brahmin might become disillusioned with saṃsāra, he said to him, ‘Don’t be lazy, young brahmin, for in seven days you will die.’
“When the young brahmin heard this, he was filled with deep sadness, and because of his deep sadness he generated the four meditative states and the five superknowledges.
$903 “O monks, what do you think? I am the one who was that sage then, and lived the life of a bodhisattva. The one who was that young brahmin then is none other than Black himself. At that time he was terrified of dying, and I placed him in the four meditative states and the five superknowledges. Now as well he was terrified of dying, and I have led him to go forth and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.
$904 “He also went forth in the doctrine of Buddha Kāśyapa. After practicing pure conduct all his life then, his faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.”
The Story of Iṣudhara
$905 In Kapilavastu there once lived a certain Śākya [235.a] called Daṇḍadhara. He was prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. He took a wife of the same caste, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named him, saying, “Since this is Daṇḍadhara’s child, his name will be Iṣudhara.”
$906 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and he flourished like a lotus in a lake. As the young man grew up, they made him study letters, and trained him in all the different fields of craft and skill in which duly consecrated rulers of the royal caste train, such as how to ride an elephant, how to ride horseback, how to wield a weapon, and how to shoot an arrow, advance, retreat, wage war, grasp with an iron hook, wield a lasso, shoot a spear, throw a single-pointed vajra, throw other single-pointed weapons, and throw a disk; how to cut, cleave, grapple and hold, employ footwork, guard one’s head, strike from a distance, and strike at the noise of an unseen enemy; and how to target the vital points, take infallible aim, and maximize damage. By the time he had been educated in all of these, he was learned in the five fields of knowledge.
$907 One day Śākya Daṇḍadhara’s wife conceived again, and after nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. When she was born, [235.b] it was immediately well known throughout Kapilavastu that Śākya Daṇḍadhara’s daughter was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful, with a most radiant complexion. At the elaborate feast celebrating her birth they asked, “What name should we give this child?” And they named her, saying, “Since she was renowned all over Kapilavastu at birth, her name will be Yaśodharā.”
$908 They reared young Yaśodharā on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and she flourished like a lotus in a lake. Then when she had grown, she was given to the Bodhisattva in marriage. Through Yaśodharā, young Iṣudhara became good friends with the Bodhisattva, so when the Bodhisattva witnessed old age, sickness, and death, and went to live in the forest, young Iṣudhara was very upset. “What was it he saw,” he wondered, “that he went forth, giving up the kingdom of a universal monarch and my sister both?”
$909 When the Bodhisattva achieved unexcelled wisdom and began to act for the benefit of those to be tamed, he traveled to Kapilavastu. There he was reunited with his father and son, and thousands upon thousands of Śākyas went to see the Blessed One, offering their service and respect. Since he had been so upset, Śākya Iṣudhara did not wish to see the Blessed One, but the Śākyas insisted on bringing him before the Blessed One. So as not to upset the Śākyas, the youth Iṣudhara went so far as to receive the five precepts from the Blessed One.
$910 Since he had previously been so upset, one day he thought, “Though I did take the five fundamental precepts from him, it was a mistake, so there’s no reason I have to keep them.” Then, because he had previously been so upset, he broke the five fundamental precepts.
$911 Now, when the Śākyas heard this, they reflected on how he had broken the five fundamental precepts and felt compassion for him. [236.a] “It isn’t right that he should be reborn among the hell beings because he broke the fundamental precepts,” they thought. So one day the Śākyas went to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they touched their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and took a seat at one side.
$912 Once they had taken their seats to one side, the Śākyas beseeched the Blessed One, “Lord, Śākya Iṣudhara has broken the fundamental precepts. He’s started drinking. Blessed One, attend to him. We ask you, keep him from falling to lower realms.” The Blessed One assented to the Śākyas by his silence.
$913 Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, all the Śākyas rejoiced, praising this assurance from the Blessed One. Then, after touching their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, they took leave of him.
$914 The Blessed One thought, “I will ripen his faculties,” and for a while, the Blessed One did not speak to him at all. Observing that he had only seven days left to live, the Blessed One declared to the monks, “In seven days Śākya Iṣudhara will be dead.” Word spread like oil pressed from grain that it had been prophesied that Śākya Iṣudhara would be dead in seven days. But he had no faith in the Blessed One, so he stayed up on the roof of his palatial home, enjoying himself with women and coupling to the sound of music without interacting with other people.
$915 The Blessed One thought, “First I shall send the greatest of my disciples to him, and then I shall go myself.” The Blessed One then spoke to Aniruddha, saying, “Aniruddha, attend to Śākya Iṣudhara.”
“As you wish, Lord,” Venerable Aniruddha replied, [236.b] and he went to Śākya Iṣudhara’s house with other monks trailing behind him.
$916 Śākya Iṣudhara heard that the monk Aniruddha had come there to his house. When he heard this, out of love for his younger brother Aniruddha,#146 he went to him, bowed down at his feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma. Venerable Aniruddha gave a discourse that would ripen him, and departed.
$917 On the second day, the Blessed One sent Ānanda, and on the third day Venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana. On the fourth day he sent Venerable Śāriputra, and Venerable Śāriputra taught him the Dharma in such a way as to inspire faith in the Blessed One. Then Śākya Iṣudhara became terrified of his death.
$918 On the fifth day, the Blessed One directly apprehended his mind and went to Iṣudhara’s house in person. Śākya Iṣudhara saw the Blessed One from a distance, and, when he saw him, he felt a surge of joy toward the Blessed One. In his joy he set up a seat for the Blessed One and called out to the Blessed One, “This way, Blessed One—if you please! Welcome, Blessed One, very good! Blessed One, please have a seat on this cushion I have prepared for you!” Once the Blessed One had taken his place on the seat prepared for him, Śākya Iṣudhara touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$919 “Iṣudhara,” the Blessed One taught, “among fears, the fear of death is but a minor one. Supreme among fears is the fear of birth among the hell beings, the animals, or the anguished spirits.”
“Lord,” he asked, “What is it like for the hell beings?” [237.a]
$920 So that Iṣudhara might become disillusioned with saṃsāra, the Blessed One transported him with his miraculous powers and showed him the beings of the eight great hells.#147 Śākya Iṣudhara asked, “Lord, what deeds cause one to take birth here?”
$921 The Blessed One explained, “Those who inure themselves to the act of killing and commit it many times will take birth here. Thereafter, whenever they die and transmigrate, they will take birth here again into the same conditions, and their lives will be short.”
$922 When the Blessed One showed him in detail the paths of the ten nonvirtuous actions in the same way, right away Iṣudhara became particularly afraid. “If you take the fundamental precepts from the Blessed One and don’t protect them,” he worried, “won’t you take birth as a hell being, an animal, or an anguished spirit?” So he confessed that he had broken all his precepts, and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma.
$923 Then the Blessed One taught Śākya Iṣudhara the Dharma particularly suited to him. When he heard it he destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat. Having seen the truths, after his death he immediately took rebirth as a god.
$924 Upon taking rebirth as a god, he wondered, “Whence did I die and transmigrate?” and he saw that he had died as a human being. “Where have I taken birth?” he wondered, and he saw he had taken birth as a god. “What action did I take?” he wondered, and he saw that at the time of his death he had maintained the fundamental precepts and felt joy toward the Blessed One as well. “Not a day should pass without my seeing the Blessed One and offering him my respect,” he thought.
$925 So he decorated himself with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones, put on a crown decorated with various types of precious jewels, and perfumed his body with saffron, tamala, spṛka, and other herbs. That night he filled the front of his long shirt with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, [237.b] and mandārava flowers, and went to see the Blessed One. Upon his arrival he scattered the divine blue flowers over the Blessed One and sat before the Blessed One to listen to the Dharma. The Blessed One taught him the Dharma particularly suited to him, and then sat there in silence. Understanding that the Blessed One had completed his discourse, Śākya Iṣudhara praised the Buddha’s words, rejoiced, circumambulated the Blessed One three times, and disappeared on the spot.
$926 Now at the time of his death, the Śākyas had been filled with doubt and wondered, “Since Śākya Iṣudhara broke his precepts and started drinking alcohol, what will be his destination? When he takes rebirth, where will his next life be? We must put this question to the Blessed One! However the Blessed One describes it to us, so shall we consider it to be.”
$927 The Śākyas went to see the Blessed One. Upon their arrival they bowed down at his feet and took their seats to one side. Once they had taken their seats to one side, the Śākyas inquired of the Blessed One, “Lord, Śākya Iṣudhara broke his precepts and started to drink. Lord, what will his destination be? When he takes rebirth, where will his next life be?”
“My friends, he took rebirth as a god!” the Blessed One replied.
$928 “Lord, Śākya Iṣudhara broke his precepts and started to drink. How could he have taken birth as a god?” they asked.
“At the time of his death,” the Blessed One explained, “Śākya Iṣudhara confessed that he had broken his precepts, and having manifested the resultant state of stream entry, he took rebirth as a god.”
$929 As soon as they heard this, the Śākyas were filled with wonder, and exclaimed, “O Buddha! O Dharma! O Saṅgha! Oh Dharma, so well spoken! You lift up beings, even those who have passed on to lower realms, [238.a] and send them to the god realms!” Having marveled so, they engaged in especially reverent service toward the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha.
$930 “Lord,” the monks requested the Blessed Buddha, “tell us why Śākya Iṣudhara was terrified of dying and then the Blessed One rescued him from his fear of death and established him in the unsurpassed, supreme welfare of nirvāṇa.”
$931 “Not only now,” the Blessed One explained, “but in times past as well, and in the same way, he was terrified of dying and then protected his precepts for seven days, because of which he took rebirth in a god realm. Listen well!
$932 “Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, a certain poor merchant lived in the city of Vārāṇasī.
$933 “One day he found faith in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Kāśyapa. The merchant wished so deeply to give gifts and make merit, and he thought, ‘With what little I have here, I shall not be able to give gifts and make merit. So, I will complete a voyage on a great seafaring vessel. If I’m able to complete even a single voyage on a great seafaring vessel, my parents’ descendants will be prosperous for seven generations.’ With this thought he loaded up his wares and set sail upon the great ocean, and after completing his voyage across the great ocean on that great seafaring vessel, he began to give gifts and make merit.
$934 “He also had a short lifespan. So that he might become disillusioned with saṃsāra, [238.b] the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa spoke about him saying, ‘That merchant is certain to die in seven days.’
$935 “Word spread all over like oil pressed from grain, and when the merchant heard that the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa had prophesied that he would die in seven days, he became terrified of dying and immediately approached the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. Upon his arrival he went for refuge, and took the fundamental precepts from Buddha Kāśyapa, and after he died, he transmigrated and took rebirth as a god.
$936 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was that merchant then is none other than Śākya Iṣudhara. There, terrified of dying, he maintained the fundamental precepts and took rebirth in the god realms. Now as well, terrified of dying, he took refuge and maintained the fundamental precepts, because of which he was able to reach the god realms and liberation.”
The Man Who Was Trampled
$937 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, a certain brahmin lived there. He took a wife of the same caste, and as they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child who was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan.
$938 They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, and as he grew up, he studied letters, brahminical customs and conduct, the syllables oṃ and bho , ritual purity, ritual actions , the collection of ashes, holding the ritual vase, the Ṛg Veda , the Yajur Veda , the Sāma Veda , the Atharva Veda , how to perform sacrificial rites, how to lead others in performing sacrificial rites, [239.a] how to give and receive offerings, recitation, and recitation instruction. Trained in these procedures, he became a master of the six types of brahminical activities, and in time he mastered the eighteen sciences.
$939 By the time he was sixteen years old, he mastered all the scriptures and thus defeated the advocates of all the different philosophical schools. Then he made a commitment to scriptural debate, saying, “None will be my equal, much less my superior.” He became arrogant about scriptural debate, and disrespected all the other brahmins. One day the thought came to the other brahmins, “The ascetic Gautama tames those who are not tamed. Let us present this young man to the ascetic Gautama. Maybe he’ll even lead him to go forth! If that happens, we’ll be free of him.”
$940 So that they could present the young man to the Blessed Buddha, the disrespected brahmins told him, “Child, you are like a son to us. What’s the use of saying, ‘None will be my equal, much less my superior,’ and becoming so arrogant about your wisdom? For the ascetic Gautama is both beautiful in body and beautiful in mind, omniscient and all-seeing. You don’t have even a fraction of his fine form, or his knowledge—not even a hundredth, not even a thousandth, not even a hundred thousandth.”
$941 As soon as he heard this, the young brahmin was eager to meet the Blessed One. When he went to visit the Blessed One, the young brahmin saw the Blessed One from a distance. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart.
$942 Upon seeing the Blessed Buddha [239.b] , he was filled with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$943 At such a sight, whatever arrogance he had about his own form disappeared. But still he thought, “While he may be very great, he is not equal to me in wisdom. Nevertheless, I will test whether he is in fact omniscient and all-seeing.” He thought up questions in advance and went to see the Blessed One. When he arrived, he immediately made all manner of entertaining and jovial conversation and then took a seat at one side.
$944 Now the Blessed One directly apprehended what he was thinking, foresaw the questions he had prepared, and answered them directly. Then the young brahmin took great delight in the Blessed One, thinking, “I’m certain he is omniscient and all-seeing.” Then he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and implored him, “Blessed One, please permit me to invite you, together with the saṅgha of monks, to take your meals at my house for seven days.” The Blessed One assented by his silence. Understanding that by his silence the Blessed One had given his assent, the young brahmin then touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and took leave of him.
$945 After that, having offered food to the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks for seven days, on the last day he satisfied the Buddha and the rest of the saṅgha of monks with food of a hundred flavors and to the Blessed One he offered a very costly robe. [240.a] To each of the monks he also offered a set of robes fashioned from cotton and then sat before them to listen to the Dharma.
$946 Then the Blessed One directly apprehended the thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature of the young brahmin, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, the young brahmin destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of stream entry right where he sat.
$947 After seeing the truths, he asked for his parents’ permission, then drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$948 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$949 “Lord,” the monks inquired of the Blessed Buddha, “what action did the young brahmin take that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; that he mastered all the scriptures [240.b] and defeated the advocates of all the different philosophical schools; and that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
“It came about by the power of his prayers,” replied the Blessed One.
$950 “Lord, where did he make these prayers?” they asked.
“Monks,” the Blessed One recounted, “in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years and the tathāgata, the arhat, the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, he carried out all the activities of a buddha and passed beyond all sorrow into the realm of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates.
$951 “King Kṛkī covered his reliquary stūpa and the entire surrounding area for the distance of one mile with four different kinds of jewels. When it was complete in every respect, he made great offerings to it and announced the opening of the traditional festival of the stūpa. Then the king proclaimed, ‘When the festival occurs, every single person living in Vārāṇasī must go to venerate the stūpa. Those who do not go will have all their possessions confiscated.’
$952 “King Kṛkī’s magistrate was a faithless person, whose son had become an intimate of the prince. Out of anger, that faithless brahmin magistrate did not go to the stūpa. When King Kṛkī heard this, he thought, ‘My magistrate has disobeyed my command,’ and felt an upsurge of anger. ‘I shall confiscate all his possessions, and never return them!’ he shouted. The prince heard his words and told the magistrate’s son, ‘Hurry to the festival of the stūpa, [241.a] and tell your father that the king may confiscate all your possessions!’
$953 “As soon as he heard this, the brahmin magistrate’s son fled to the monastery.#148 There he saw a great crowd in earnest veneration of the stūpa. After the magistrate’s son saw this, he found faith in the stūpa, made a large offering to it, and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I be well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful. May I master all the scriptures. May I defeat the advocates of all the different philosophical schools. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$954 “As it happened, the young man was trampled by the crowd, and died, but dying as he did—filled with joy at the thought of the stūpa—he transmigrated and took rebirth as a god.
$955 “Now when young gods and goddesses are born they possess three different types of innate knowledge. They know (1) whence they have died and transmigrated, (2) where they have been born, and (3) why they have taken birth there.
$956 He saw that when he died as a human being, filled with joy at the thought of the stūpa of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, he transmigrated and took rebirth as a god. As soon as he recognized this, he immediately recalled the buddha’s previous kindness. He began to decorate himself with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones, put on a crown decorated with various types of precious jewels, perfumed his body with saffron, tamala, spṛka, and other herbs, and that very night [241.b] he filled the front of his long shirt with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers, and traveled to the stūpa of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. When he arrived he scattered the divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers over the stūpa of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa, and after he scattered the divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers, he sat filled with joy at the thought of the stūpa.
$957 “While he was sitting there, his father heard the news that his son had been trampled by the crowd and died, and he hurried to the stūpa. The young god saw him there holding the child’s corpse on his lap, wailing in sorrow and lamenting, and said to him, ‘Oh Father, you needn’t mourn for me. Don’t mourn for me. Don’t sit and suffer so.’
$958 “ ‘Who are you?’ the brahmin asked.
“ ‘I am your son,’ he replied.
“ ‘Where did you take rebirth?’ he asked.
“ ‘I took birth among the gods,’ he replied.
$959 “ ‘What action did you take to be born there?’ he asked.
“ ‘I venerated the stūpa, and was filled with joy at the thought of it. If you give up your former attitude, venerate the stūpa, and become filled with joy at the thought of it, you too will become a source of goodness.’ Having said this, the young god disappeared on the spot.
$960 “When he heard these words, the brahmin no longer mourned his son and felt great happiness toward the stūpa. In his happiness he made a large offering to the stūpa and prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. Entrusting myself to my son, may I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha.’ [242.a]
$961 “O monks, what do you think? The one who was the magistrate’s son then is none other than this young brahmin. The one who was his father then is none other than this brahmin. The young brahmin’s act of venerating the stūpa and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth; such that he was well proportioned, pleasing to the eye, and beautiful; and such that he mastered all the scriptures and defeated the advocates of all the different philosophical schools.
$962 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.
$963 “His father’s act of venerating the stūpa and saying that prayer ripened such that wherever he was born, it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. His son was the sole condition that caused him to please me, and not displease me.”
The Story of Jackal
$964 When the Blessed One was in Śrāvastī, there was a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s. When the time came for him to marry he took a wife, and they enjoyed themselves and coupled. As they enjoyed themselves and coupled, one day his wife conceived, whereupon her whole body began to smell of excrement. Then she had the impulse to eat excrement and drink urine,#149 and she told her husband, “Lord, I’m having certain impulses.” [242.b] When he heard this, the householder was devastated, and he thought, “Has my wife been possessed by one of those rotting spirits?”
$965 He took her to the soothsayers, and the soothsayers assured him, “Your wife has not been possessed by a rotting spirit. All this has taken place on account of the being in her womb. When the child is born, the smell of excrement will disappear from her body and such impulses will disappear from her mind.”
$966 As soon as he heard this, the man began applying all manner of ointments to his wife’s body. He was also worried that she would eat excrement and drink urine, so he appointed attendants and guards for his wife. After nine or ten months had passed, she gave birth to a child caked in excrement and urine. Upon his birth the house was suffused by the smell of excrement. The women washed the child and laid him out on the bed, but still the smell of excrement did not clear from his body, so his mother began applying all manner of ointments to him and left him like that. After his birth the mother’s previous impulses disappeared.
$967 At the elaborate feast celebrating his birth they named him according to their clan. They reared him on milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, and milk solids, but once he was able to walk, he would pick up excrement—some to eat, some to smear on his body—until the women put a stop to this. As he grew up they made him study letters, but when they sent him to a teacher, wherever there was some filthy excrement, he would go and eat it.
$968 When his parents heard about this, they were devastated. “Oh sure, we had a son,” they thought, “but if he has problems like this—spoken ill of, all over the world—what use is he to us?” and they threw him out of the house. And so he went to live in filthy excrement, and [243.a] constantly ate excrement and drank urine. Many people saw him eating filth, and when they saw this, they remarked to one another, “This young man is like a jackal , eating excrement and drinking urine.” So instead of his old name they started calling him Jackal, since he ate excrement and drank urine like a jackal.
$969 One day Pūraṇa Kāśyapa saw him, and thought, “We ascetics merely vow to eat only cow dung, and yet here is this child practicing even greater austerities than ours! If he went forth with us, his merit would multiply greatly.” So he asked the young man, “Child, did you take a vow to do this, or is it merely your custom to do so?”
“I don’t know that I’ve taken a vow, really,” the young man replied. “I just crave excrement. I don’t care for ordinary food and drink.”
$970 “Child, become a renunciant like us,” urged Pūraṇa Kāśyapa . “Go forth with us and take a vow to do this. That will cause your merit to multiply greatly.”
“Sure, I’ll do whatever you like,” the young man said.
$971 With those words the young man followed him to his dwelling place, and after they had plucked out all his hair, they gave him a cup and a broom of peacock feathers, and he made a vow to eat excrement. Then he went to where there was some excrement, and there he stayed.
$972 Now at that time some five hundred anguished spirits had settled down in Śrāvastī. At night when all the people were sleeping, they would go from one pile of excrement to another, eating the excrement and drinking the urine. The young man could hear the sounds the anguished spirits made, but he could not see their forms.
$973 One day Pūraṇa Kāśyapa checked up on him and asked, “Child, you took vows of yogic discipline. Have they brought you any special attainments?”
“What do you mean by ‘special’?” the young man asked in return.
Pūraṇa asked him, “Have you seen something like#150 a divine form, or [243.b] have you heard the sounds of gods?”
$974 “I have not seen anything like a divine form,” he said, “though I did hear the sounds of many people. But I couldn’t see them, exactly.”
“Those are the great souls whose yogic disciplines have been successful!” Pūraṇa exclaimed. “Renew your vow and stay on here. For if you do, it’s possible they will also show their bodies.”
$975 One day the anguished spirits thought, “Just as we have committed misdeeds and taken birth here and now undergo such sufferings as these, so too this young man is undergoing these sufferings as a result of his previous misdeeds.” And then they said, “What reason do we have then for not showing our bodies to him?” So the anguished spirits showed their bodies to the young man, and he cavorted with them.
$976 Soon after, Pūraṇa Kāśyapa checked up on him again and asked, “Child, have those whose yogic disciplines were successful shown their bodies to you at all?”
“They did show me their bodies,” he said, “but in a very ugly way.”
$977 “Renew your vow yet again and stay on here,” Pūraṇa Kāśyapa suggested. “It’s possible they will show you their true forms.”
Around that time Venerable Śāriputra thought, “These anguished spirits have exhausted their previous deeds. They will die without delay. Thus I will tame them.”
$978 Venerable Śāriputra went to see the five hundred anguished spirits and said, “So it is, my friends: All conditioned things are impermanent. All phenomena are selfless. Nirvāṇa is peace. Let your minds be filled with joy at the thought of me, and you may even be freed from taking birth as anguished spirits.” With that, he departed. The anguished spirits died, filled with joy at the thought of Venerable Śāriputra, and after they died, they took rebirth in the realm of the gods.
$979 Now when young gods and goddesses are born they possess three different types of innate knowledge. [244.a] They know (1) whence they have died and transmigrated, (2) where they have been born, and (3) why they have taken birth there.
$980 They saw that when they had died as anguished spirits, filled with joy at the thought of Śāriputra, they transmigrated and took rebirth as gods. The young gods who formerly were anguished spirits thought, “It’s been a whole day since we went to see the Blessed One. This isn’t proper of us. Not a day should pass without our seeing the Blessed One.”
$981 Then the young gods who formerly were anguished spirits decorated themselves with earrings, garlands, and strings of precious stones, put on crowns decorated with various types of precious jewels, and perfumed their bodies with saffron, tamala, spṛka, and other herbs. That night they filled the front of their long shirts with divine blue lotus, lotus, white water lily, white lotus, and mandārava flowers. They approached the Blessed One and scattered the divine flowers over him. Then the Blessed One taught them the Dharma, and all of them saw the truths.
$982 After seeing the truths, they took leave of the Blessed One. On their way back whence they came, they recalled young Jackal and thought, “By entrusting ourselves to Noble Śāriputra, we were freed from rebirth as anguished spirits, and took rebirth as gods. Let us go now and act for the benefit of Jackal. Then he too will go to see the Blessed One, and by entrusting himself to the Blessed One, perhaps he too will be freed from suffering.” With this thought, they disappeared from the garden of Prince Jeta and traveled to the area of Śrāvastī where Jackal was. They stayed in the sky above the region in an immense celestial mansion, and the entire region of Śrāvastī was filled with a bright light.
$983 Young Jackal saw the five hundred gods and asked, “Who are you?”
“We’re your former friends,” they replied.
“I’ve never before seen you in this kind [244.b] of dress,” said the young man.
“We have died from this place and taken birth among the gods,” they explained.
$984 “You took a vow of yogic discipline, and that was enough for you to take birth among the gods?” Jackal said.
“It was not because we took vows of yogic discipline,” they told him. “Due to our previous misdeeds we had taken birth as anguished spirits. But by entrusting ourselves to Noble Śāriputra, we were freed from rebirth as anguished spirits and took rebirth as gods. Take refuge in the Blessed Buddha, and perhaps you too will be freed from suffering.” After they said that, the gods all disappeared.
$985 Pūraṇa Kāśyapa saw the five hundred gods go to see Jackal, and he told the others, “Just like that, the gods even showed him their bodies and then departed. This great soul has accomplished his vow!” No sooner had they heard this than many of those beings took vows to eat excrement.
$986 After young Jackal heard the gods’ words he thought, “I should go see the Blessed Buddha and offer him my respect, but I can’t bear to see the Blessed One with my body covered in excrement like this.” So he went to the banks of the Ajiravatī River, scoured his whole body with earth, washed himself, and then went to see the Blessed One.
$987 Young Jackal saw the Blessed One. His body, graced and resplendent with the thirty-two signs of a great person, looked like it was on fire, like flames stoked with ghee, like a lamp set in a golden vessel, and like a pillar adorned with all manner of jewels. He was immaculate, clear-minded, and pure of heart.
$988 When he saw the Blessed Buddha the sight of him filled him with supreme joy, for beings who have gathered the roots of virtue to see a buddha for the first time experience such rapture [245.a] as is not to be had even by those who practice calm abiding meditation for twelve years.
$989 Seeing the Blessed Buddha in this way filled him with supreme joy. Full of such joy he approached the Blessed One, touched his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat before him to listen to the Dharma.
$990 The Blessed One directly apprehended his thoughts, habitual tendencies, temperament, capacity, and nature, and taught him the Dharma accordingly. When he heard it, young Jackal destroyed with the thunderbolt of wisdom the twenty high peaks of the mountain of views concerning the transitory collection, and manifested the resultant state of non-return right where he sat.
$991 After seeing the truths, he rose from his seat, drew down the right shoulder of his upper garment, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms pressed together, and requested the Blessed One, “Lord, if permitted I wish to go forth in the Dharma and Vinaya so well spoken, complete my novitiate, and achieve full ordination. In the presence of the Blessed One, I too wish to practice the holy life.”
$992 With the words “Come, join me, monk! Practice the holy life,” the Blessed One led him to go forth as a novice, conferred on him full ordination, and instructed him. Casting away all afflictive emotions through diligence, practice, and effort, he manifested arhatship. As an arhat, free from the attachments of the three realms, his mind regarded gold no differently than filth, and the palms of his hands as like space itself. He became cool like wet sandalwood. His insight crushed ignorance like an eggshell. He achieved the insights, superknowledges, and discriminations. He had no regard for worldly profit, passion, or acclaim. He became an object of offering, veneration, and respectful address by Indra, Upendra, and the other gods.
$993 “Lord,” the monks asked the Blessed Buddha, “what action did Jackal take [245.b] that ripened into his birth into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth, and that as soon as he was born, the smell of excrement arose from all over his body, he desired excrement, and he lived in excrement? What action did he take that ripened such that he pleased the Blessed One, did not displease him, went forth in the doctrine of the Blessed One, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship?”
$994 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that he committed and accumulated:
“Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha possessed of insight and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, there lived in Vārāṇasī a certain householder, prosperous and wealthy, a person of vast and magnificent means, endowed with the wealth of Vaiśravaṇa—with wealth to rival Vaiśravaṇa’s.
$995 “In admiration for the Buddha, in admiration for the Dharma, and in admiration for the Saṅgha, he went for refuge and took the fundamental precepts. Manifesting the resultant state of non-return, he thought, ‘Seeing as I do not have a son or daughter, after I die all I have will become property of the king. I will show my respect to the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha.’ He built a monastery complete in every respect, provided the monks with everything they needed, and appointed a monk to act as steward.
$996 “Then one day the steward had something to do out in the countryside, and after making a request of the householder, he departed. After he had gone, [246.a] an arhat, who had been traveling and traveling through the countryside, arrived at the monastery. The householder saw his elegance and the elegance of his attendants, and immediately admired him. In his admiration he thought, ‘If I extend an invitation to him alone, he will not assent, so I will invite the entire saṅgha of monks to my house for food.’ He bowed down at his feet and said, ‘Noble one, please permit me to request you and the saṅgha of monks to take your food at my house tomorrow.’
$997 “Then the arhat thought, ‘If I don’t accept, it will not only be an obstacle to the benefit of these monks. It will also be an obstacle to this patron’s merit.’ With this in mind, he assented by his silence.
“The next day, the householder readied his house with ritual bathing implements, beds, and seats for the saṅgha of monks. He prepared the water pitchers and then extended an invitation to the monks that said, ‘Noble ones, noon is upon us and it is time for the baths. Know that the time has come, noble ones, and your presence is requested.’
$998 “As the monks arrived at his house, the householder called for a barber, had him cut all the monks’ hair, offered them a bath, and by his own hand contented them with many good, wholesome foods.
“When the steward monk had completed his work in the valley, he returned to the monastery. Not seeing the other monks upon his return, he asked, ‘Where did they go?’ and the answer came, ‘The householder invited them to his home.’
“ ‘On whose behalf?’ he asked.
“ ‘He invited them on behalf of a new monk who just arrived,’ they replied.
$999 “As soon as he heard this, he was very dismayed. ‘What is it he [246.b] did, that on his behalf the entire saṅgha of monks received such an invitation?’ he thought. This made him irate, and he went to the householder’s home. Upon his arrival he looked and saw the householder serving the arhat with devotion and respect, and his jealousy caused him to become even more irate.
$1000 “As the monks were all returning to the monastery after finishing their meals, he went to see the arhat and said, ‘Lord, do you even know who this householder is?’
“ ‘I know he is a non-returner,’ replied the arhat.
“ ‘Well if that’s the case,’ the steward monk said, ‘better that you would pluck out your own hair than for him to shave your head! Better that you would sink in excrement than make off with his bathing implements! Better that you would eat excrement and drink urine than take his food and drink!’
$1001 “Then the arhat thought, ‘It’s not right for this emotionally afflicted person, who has become so abased, to continue in this downward spiral. I have to help him.’ With this thought, he said, ‘Venerable One, do you know who I am? And do you know who you yourself are?’
“ ‘I know that you have gone forth,’ he replied, ‘as have I.’
$1002 “ ‘Though we two are like brothers in having gone forth,’ the arhat said, ‘you are an ordinary person, bound by every fetter, and I am an arhat, liberated from every fetter. You must confess the mistake you’ve made by speaking harshly to me. Otherwise you are certain to roam in saṃsāra and meet with great suffering.’
$1003 “Hearing him, the monk was flooded with regret and bowed down at the feet of the arhat and asked his forgiveness. After that he practiced pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, he prayed, ‘By this root of virtue, may I not meet with the results of the act [247.a] of speaking harsh words to an arhat. By the root of the virtue of later rendering service to the saṅgha in accord with the Dharma, and practicing pure conduct all my life, wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth. May I please and not displease Uttara, the young brahmin prophesied by the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa to be the next blessed buddha. Going forth in his doctrine alone may I cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifest arhatship.’
$1004 “O monks, what do you think? The monk who was the steward then is none other than Jackal. The act of speaking harshly to an arhat and telling him, ‘Better that you would pluck out your own hair than for him to shave your head!’ ripened such that wherever he was born, his hair was plucked out. The act of telling him, ‘Better that you would sink in excrement than make off with his bathing implements!’ ripened such that wherever he was born, he lived in excrement. The act of telling him, ‘Better that you would eat excrement and drink urine than take his food and drink!’ ripened such that wherever he was born, he ate excrement and drank urine. The acts of serving as steward for the saṅgha in accord with the Dharma, practicing pure conduct all his life, and at the time of his death, praying, ‘Wherever I am born, may it be into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth,’ ripened such that wherever he was born it was into a family of great means, prosperity, and wealth.
$1005 “So it is, monks, now that I myself have become the very equal [247.b] of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa—equal in strength, equal in deeds, and equal in skillful means—that he has pleased me, not displeased me, gone forth in my very doctrine, cast away all afflictive emotions, and manifested arhatship.”
“Lord,” the monks inquired, “what action did the five hundred anguished spirits take that ripened into their births as anguished spirits? What actions did they take that ripened such that, once they took rebirth as gods, they also pleased the Blessed One, and did not displease him?”
$1006 “Monks,” the Blessed One explained, “such are the actions that they committed and accumulated:
“Monks, in times past, in this fortunate eon, when people lived as long as twenty thousand years, and the totally and completely awakened buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the tamer of persons, the charioteer, the unsurpassed one, the teacher of humans and gods, the blessed buddha known as Kāśyapa was in the world, they all became lay vow holders. When the monks came asking them for provisions of clothing, food, bedding, seats, and medicines for the sick, overcome with stinginess they said, ‘Kāśyapa’s ascetics are just like anguished spirits, going around begging food from others!’ and called after them with other such harsh words.
$1007 “O monks, what do you think? Those who were the five hundred lay vow holders then are none other than these five hundred anguished spirits. The act of speaking harshly to the monks ripened into their taking birth as anguished spirits for five hundred lifetimes. At that time they went for refuge in the doctrine of the totally and completely awakened Buddha Kāśyapa. They maintained the fundamental precepts, their faculties ripened, and now they have been liberated.” [248.a]
$1008 This concludes Part Five of The Hundred Deeds.